
Title: The Attache at Peking

Author: Algernon Bertram Freeman-Mitford

Release Date: April 5, 2023 [eBook #70467]

Language: English

Produced by: MWS, Quentin Campbell, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ATTACHE AT PEKING ***


In the transcription that follows, italic text is denoted by
_underscores_ while bold text is denoted by =equal signs=.

Small capitals in the original text have been transcribed as ALL
CAPITALS. Superscripted text is prefixed by a caret (^) symbol.

                                 ————

See end of this document for details of corrections and other changes.

          —————————————————— Start of Book ——————————————————


[Illustration: Decorative illustration facing the title page]




                              THE ATTACHE

                               AT PEKING


                                  BY
                      A. B. FREEMAN-MITFORD, C.B.
       AUTHOR OF ‘TALES OF OLD JAPAN,’ ‘THE BAMBOO GARDEN,’ ETC.


                                London
                      MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
                    NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
                                 1900

                        _All rights reserved._




                                PREFACE


These letters were written many years ago, but in China, and especially
at Peking, the old order changes slowly, and they are at any rate a
faithful record of the life which was led by those whose duties lay, as
the Chinese say, “within the walls.” They profess no more than that.
Those who wish to learn more about China and Chinese manners must go
to that monumental work of the late Dr. Wells Williams, _The Middle
Kingdom_, to Sir John Davies’s fascinating book, _The Chinese_, or to
Professor Douglas’s book on Chinese society.

It will occur to many people to ask how it comes that we should have
lived for so many years peacefully, travelling through the country
unarmed, in the midst of a people capable of the atrocities which
have recently taken place. China is of all countries the land of
contradiction and of paradox. But I think that those who read these
letters will see that though, for obvious reasons, they were written
in a spirit of optimism, there was an undercurrent of feeling that
at any moment things might become very different. For instance, if
the insurrection in Shantung had not been quelled, and the rebels had
marched upon Peking, which was undoubtedly part of their programme,
the tragedy of 1900 might, and probably would, have been anticipated
in 1865. Moreover, although we were riding at anchor in smooth water,
there were from time to time uncomfortable signs of disturbance below.
I remember how on more than one occasion we were warned that on such
and such a day there would be a massacre of Europeans for the old
reason, the murder of babies whose eyes were used for purposes of
photography. These stories were put about by intriguing mandarins, who
succeeded in deceiving even some of the more ignorant of their own
class. The famous General Tsêng Kwo Fan (father of the Marquis Tsêng,
who was afterwards minister in London) was talking one day with an
English doctor on the subject of this babies’-eyes fraud, when suddenly
he said, “It is no use your attempting to deny it, for I have here some
of the dried specimens,” and he pulled out a packet of those gelatine
capsules which are used for covering castor oil and other nauseous
drugs! We paid little heed to these warnings, though, as recent events
have proved, there was perhaps more in them than we supposed. We were
sitting on a volcano, for experience has often shown how swiftly
this seemingly mild and almost childlike people can be lashed into a
fury like that of the flaming legions of hell. One thing we knew for
certain. If a rising should take place, we were in a death-trap from
which there could be no escape. Those grim and frowning gates once
shut, rescue was impossible, for what could a mere handful of men—in
those days there were but some seventy or eighty Europeans, all told,
in Peking—avail against the seething mob of enraged devils? When years
afterwards, in 1879, there came the horror of Sir Louis Cavagnari’s
murder, with all his company, at Cabul, I could but think how much the
position of the Legations at Peking resembled his.

It is the fashion to belaud Japan for the spirit of progress which she
has shown, at the expense of China, which remains wedded to old ways
and worn-out customs. Much as we may admire the marvellous headway
which Japan has made, this is hardly quite fair. It must be remembered
that Japan has never originated anything. All that she knew, up to the
time of her first real intercourse with foreigners forty years ago,
she owed to China. Buddhism, which replaced and in some sort throve
hand-in-hand with the old ancestor worship, the Shintô, reading and
writing, every art and accomplishment, from music and dancing down to
the game of football, all filtered through Corea from China to Japan,
and the dates of their advent are solemnly recorded as important facts
in the _O Dai Ichi Ran_. “A Glance at the Generation of the Kings,”
the native history. Borrowers from the beginning of time, it mattered
little to the Japanese whether they borrowed once more or once less,
and so when they saw that if they wished to hold a place among the
nations their only chance was to get rid of ancient Chinese forms
and adopt the civilisation of the West, they did not hesitate—they
took a leap into the light and left the thirteenth for the nineteenth
century. To hear some enthusiasts talk one would almost be led to
believe that the Japanese invented the nineteenth century. They found
it ready made to their hand. It was impossible to go through the
intermediate centuries. They had to skip, and they did it with a will.
The transformation scene was as sudden as it was complete. But it cost
the Japanese no sacrifice of national pride. What they gave up was none
of their own invention.

The Chinese, on the other hand, have an autochthon civilisation of
which they are justly proud. Five hundred years before Christ came
into the world—when the inhabitants of these islands were hopeless
savages clad in skins, or stained with woad according to the seasons,
if the old stories be true—Confucius was teaching respect for customs
which were already ancient. Since his day there have been thirteen
changes of capital and no fewer than thirty dynasties, but even when
Tartar[1] emperors have sat upon the Dragon Throne they have been
compelled to follow the rules of the Chinese, and civilisation has
remained what it was “under the shadow” of the great Teacher. No wonder
that the son of Han thinks a good many times before he will scatter his
past to the four winds of heaven, as the Japanese did without a sigh!

In one sense the mandarins have been wiser in their generation than
the men who made the Japanese revolution of 1868. These were the
daimios, such men as Satsuma, Tosa, Choshiu, and their karôs (elders
or councillors), who thinking to overthrow the Tycoon and his rule,
were blind to the fact that in so doing they were working their own
downfall as well as his. For they, no less than he, were the embodiment
of the feudal system. Where are they now? _Où sont les neiges d’antan?_
They have vanished, and their places are filled by a mushroom growth of
dukes, marquises, counts, viscounts, and barons. For Japan has stopped
short at nothing; not content with adopting the cocked hat, which as we
all know is the very marrow of all good government, giving the _entrée_
to the comity of nations, she has actually invented a full and complete
peerage. Far more astute is the mandarin. Such wily anachronisms as
Li Hung Chang and his compeers know full well that under the sun of
Western civilisation they must melt away, and it is no matter for
surprise that they die hard. All the myriads of officials, from the
highest to the lowest, swarming like ants over that vast empire, are
alive to the fact that their very existence depends on keeping up a
constant animosity against the Hung Kwei Tzŭ, the red devils. That has
always appeared to me as the keynote of the situation.

Various causes are commonly assigned for the fanaticism against
foreigners, which has from time to time broken out with fatal
consequences in different parts of China. Some blame missionary
enterprise; some commerce in general; others the opium trade in
particular. My belief is that it is due to neither of these in itself,
but to the dread of reform which haunts the official mind, and which in
the end must win its way.

The Chinese are not by nature a people of strong religious convictions,
nor have they any strong religious antipathies. If it were otherwise,
how is it that a colony of Jews[2] has dwelt among them unmolested
for two thousand years, and still remains, dwindling in numbers, it
is true, at Kai Fêng in the province of Ho Nan? How is it that the
Mohammedans have flourished exceedingly in certain provinces, even to
becoming a danger to the empire? On the walls of the Imperial palace at
Peking there is a pavilion richly decorated with Arabic inscriptions
from the Koran in honour of a Mohammedan lady who was a wife, or
favourite, of one of the emperors. This does not look like persecution
for religion’s sake. And, more than these, Buddhism? Ever since the
Emperor Ming Ti dreamt a dream, nearly nineteen centuries ago, and sent
for Buddhist books and images to China, Buddhism has been the popular
religion, as Confucianism is the popular school of moral philosophy.
Tao-ism, the native religion of Lao Tsŭ, cannot hold its own with it.
Troublous days, indeed, it has gone through at various times, but it
has outlived them, and now, to quote Dr. Morrison, “Buddhism in China
is decried by the learned, laughed at by the profligate, yet followed
by all.” (See further Wells Williams, _ut suprà_.)

Why, then, this tolerance in certain cases, side by side with the
cruellest intolerance where Christianity is concerned? If it is not
religious conviction, it must be political antipathy. And there is the
rub. The bitter hatred of Christianity is not inborn in the people,
who have in many instances, indeed, shown a sort of limp willingness,
not altogether unconnected with better wages, to embrace its tenets;
but the hostility is bred, fostered, and fomented by the mandarins to
whom it means the end of their rule. Under a Christian dispensation
the whole tottering fabric of their power must inevitably fall to
the ground. The poor Jews were to them a negligible quantity. The
Mohammedan creed, the sacred book of which may not be translated,
presents for that reason but small terrors to the lettered class,
though we hear of an old prophecy to the effect that there will be a
great Mohammedan revolution, and that a Hui-Hui (Mohammedan) dynasty
shall rule over China. Buddhism, on the other hand, except in Tibet,
aims at no temporal power, and even there the Chinese Emperor is the
Suzerain. But Christianity is a very real terror, to be put down at
any cost, however bloody. And yet, strange to say, there was a time
when it seemed as if it were destined to conquer everything and to
become the state religion. Internal dissensions and ambitions amongst
its sects alone stopped its course.

The history of the early missions to China is full of interest; it is
not possible, however, to do more than glance at it here. Putting on
one side the dim legend that St. Thomas, the doubting apostle, was
the first to preach the Gospel to the Chinese, there is no doubt that
missionaries did visit them in very remote ages. It was two Nestorian
monks who carried the first Eastern silkworms’ eggs to Justinian in
the sixth century (see my _Bamboo Garden_, pp. 31–33). It is strange
at the present time to read how at the end of the thirteenth century
John of Monte Corvino was sent by Pope Nicholas the Fourth to the
court of Kublai Khan at Kambaluk (the ancient name of Peking); how he
was kindly entreated there, building a church “which had a steeple
and belfry, with three bells that were rung every hour to summon the
new converts to prayer”; how he baptized nearly six thousand persons
during that time, “and bought one hundred and fifty children, whom he
instructed in Greek and Latin, composing for them several devotional
books.” Clement the Fifth made him an archbishop, and sent him seven
suffragan bishops. He died full of years in 1328, “having converted
more than thirty thousand infidels.” All Kambaluk is said to have
mourned for him, Christians and heathen rending their garments at
his funeral, and his tomb became the resort of pious pilgrims. This
account, which will be found given at length in the third volume of the
_Chinese Repository_, is probably not a little exaggerated; but even
discounting it largely, it is very striking as an evidence of devotion
on the one side and toleration on the other. “It is now twelve years,”
he wrote, “since I have heard any news of the west. I am become old
and gray-headed, but it is rather through labours and tribulations
than through age, for I am only fifty-eight years old. I have learned
the Tartar language and literature, into which I have translated the
whole New Testament and the Psalms of David, and have caused them to
be transcribed with the utmost care. I write and read and preach openly
and freely the testimony of the law of God.” Until the year 1368, when
the Yuan or Tartar dynasty was driven out by the Chinese, and the Ming
Emperors ruled first at Nanking and afterwards at Peking, Dr. Williams
says “there is no reasonable doubt that the greater part of Central
Asia and Northern China was the scene of many flourishing Christian
communities.” From that time forth, during upwards of two hundred
years, they dwindled away so that nothing more was heard of them.

It was at the end of the sixteenth century that the Jesuits first began
to exercise an influence which was very nearly overwhelming all rivalry
in China. Saint François Xavier, the gospeller of India and Japan, had
marked China as the special field of his future labours, but he died of
fever at the island of Shang Chuen, near Macao, being only forty-six
years old at the time of his death—a wonderful man, truly! But his work
was destined to fall into hands no less competent for the task than
his own.

Matteo Ricci, the famous Jesuit father, was born at Macerata, in the
Papal States, in 1552. At the age of nineteen he was sent to Rome to
study law, which career he quickly abandoned, to his father’s great
displeasure, to enter the Society of Jesus. Here he came under the
orders of Father Valignani, the Inspector-General of Eastern Missions,
with whom, before he had even finished his noviciate, he went to
India, continuing his studies at Goa, where he became professor of
philosophy. In 1580 he followed Father Ruggiero to Macao, where the
two priests gave themselves up to the study of the Chinese language.
They availed themselves of the trading privileges of the Portuguese
to visit Canton, and some two years later, not without encountering
some difficulties and disappointments, they obtained the permission
of the Viceroy of Kwang Tung to build a house at Shao Ching Fu, and
a church. Ricci soon saw that a reputation for learning was then,
as now, the only passport to high consideration among the lettered
classes. He published a map of China and a catechism, in which he set
forth the moral teaching of Christianity, excluding carefully all that
pertains to the doctrines of revealed religion. He had his reward,
for many learned men came to consult him, and his fame spread far
and wide. For some years the Jesuit fathers adopted the garments of
Buddhist priests, but finding that these were treated with anything
but respect, they, upon the advice of Father Valignani, dropped the
yellow robes and assumed the garb of the men of letters, whom above all
it was their wise endeavour to conciliate. Ricci paid three visits to
Nanking, but on the second occasion he was expelled, and forced to go
to Nanchang, where he established a school and published two treatises,
the _Art of Memory_ and a _Dialogue on Friendship_. This last work was
a marvellous success, for it became famous not only “for the loftiness
of its thoughts, but even for the purity of its style,” a feat perhaps
unique in a country where literary style is so much thought of, and
so difficult to attain, even by native scholars. In the year 1600 he
achieved his ambition of going to Peking charged with presents for the
Emperor Wan Li from the Portuguese at Macao. But the mission was not
accomplished without difficulty. A eunuch of the court had offered
himself as his escort, and with him Ricci set out in a native junk. But
the presents of which he was the bearer had aroused the cupidity of the
eunuch, who contrived to imprison Ricci and his companion Pantoja at
Tientsing for six months. Happily the affair came to the ears of the
Emperor, who ordered him to be released and brought to Peking, where
he was kindly received by Wan Li, who assigned him a house and salary.
Ricci soon made many friends and converts, of whom one named Sü helped
him in the translation of Euclid. His secret of success was being all
things to all men, and he contrived so to edit Christianity as to make
it fit in with existing manners and customs, and to give offence to
none. Among other things he allowed the rites of ancestral worship to
be continued, affecting to consider them as being of a civil and not
of a religious character. In short, he followed the Buddhist system
of incorporating, not condemning, those articles of native faith to
have fought against which would have been fatal to his schemes. Father
Ricci died in 1610, being fifty-eight years of age. If, on account of
the laxity of his theological concessions, he cannot be called a great
Christian missionary, he was at any rate a great conciliator, and it
was no fault of his that the seed which he successfully sowed did not
bring forth good fruit. He was possessed of rare talents, his learning
was conspicuous in many branches, and his winning charm of manner
commended him to the favour of high and low. He was perhaps the only
European who ever acquired the Chinese literary style to such a degree
as to call forth the admiration of native critics. To such an extent
was this recognised, that about 150 years after his death his treatise
on _The True Doctrine of God_, revised by a minister of state named
Sin, was included in the collection of the best Chinese works made by
the order of the Emperor Chien Lung.

To follow a man so various and so plastic as Ricci was no easy task;
but the Society of Jesus has never been wanting in men possessed at any
rate of the latter quality, and Father Longobardi proved an efficient
successor, though he did not make history. But there were troubles in
store for the missionaries. Their successes aroused the jealousies of
courtiers and officials, whose intrigues led to the publication of
an edict banishing the Christian teachers. This decree, however, was
never carried into effect. They had made many converts who protected
them, and foremost among these were Sü (Ricci’s special friend) and
his daughter, christened under the name of Candida. These two Chinese
converts were so famous for their virtues and so beloved for their
charity, that they are actually worshipped to this day by the people
at Shanghai, and the Roman Catholic Mission at Sü Chia Wei, near that
city, occupies the property once held by the Christian Sü. Candida was
indeed a saintly woman. She built no fewer than thirty-nine churches;
she published upwards of one hundred books; she established a foundling
hospital for babies whom, then as now, their unnatural parents were
in the habit of abandoning; and she employed the blind improvisatori
of the streets to substitute Gospel stories for their obscenities and
inanities. The Emperor himself conferred upon her the title of “The
Virtuous Woman,” and sent her a robe and headgear embroidered with
pearls, which she stripped off to further her religious works with
their price.

The beginning of the seventeenth century was a time of internal trouble
and revolution in China. The old Chinese dynasty of the Mings was about
to be replaced by the present Tartar dynasty, the Chi̔ng. That the
Jesuits had become a real power in the land is proved by the fact that
the claimant to the Ming throne was supported by the missionaries, his
troops being led by two native Christian generals, Kiu who was called
Thomas, and Chin who was baptized Luke. His mother, wife, and son were
christened as Helena, Maria, and Constantine, and Helena went so far as
to write to Pope Alexander VII. “expressing her attachment to the cause
of Christianity, and wishing to put the country, through him, under the
protection of God”! (Wells Williams).

The Jesuits held a high position in the early days of the Tartar rule.
This was due to the pre-eminent abilities of their leader, Johann Adam
Schall, a man of good family, native of Cologne. This great priest
was born in A.D. 1591, and entered the Society of Jesus at Rome in
1611. There he became a student of theology and mathematics, and left
for China in 1622. His great learning won for him such renown that
he was sent for by the Emperor in 1631, installed at Peking as court
astronomer, and charged with the revision of the Chinese calendar.
Needless to say this position was not won without exciting great
jealousy among the native men of science, who attacked him fiercely,
both openly and in secret. But his correct calculation of an eclipse,
as to which they were hopelessly wrong, defeated all their intrigues,
and he was more than ever in favour with the Emperor Chung Ch’êng
(the last of the Mings), who, in dread of the Tartars, caused him,
much against his will, to start a cannon foundry, rewarding him with
a pompous autograph inscription in praise of his science and virtue.
When at last the Tartars became masters of Peking, Schall, though in
continual danger himself, was able to give effectual protection to the
Christian converts. It cannot fail to strike us with amazement that,
like the Vicar of Bray, when matters settled down, Schall should have
enjoyed even more favour under the Tartar Emperor Shun Chih than he had
done under his Ming predecessor; and when, at that sovereign’s death in
1662, he actually was holding the post of tutor to the young Emperor
Káng Hsi, who became one of the most famous monarchs that ever ruled
in China, it seemed as if nothing could arrest the progress of Jesuit
influence.

But the supreme power was for a time in the hands of four regents
who were opposed to the Christians, and a memorial was presented
to court denouncing the new sect as dangerous to the state. The
Dominicans and Franciscans, of whom I shall speak presently, had,
during a quarter of a century and more, been working in opposition
to the Jesuits, and the internal dissensions of the sects gave their
enemies an opportunity of which they were not slow to avail themselves.
The memorial, a remarkable document, calls attention to the strife
between the orders as to the worship of Ti̔en (Heaven) and Shang Ti
(God), which dissensions as to the principle of doctrine show the
true aspirations of the rival sects to be political; and in this
connection the memorialists call attention to the schisms and civil war
to which Christianity gave rise in Japan, evils which could not fail
to occur sooner or later in China if the missionaries were allowed to
remain there. The regents, nothing loth, yielded to the wishes of the
memorialists, and in 1665 the Christian teachers were proscribed as
seducers of the people, leading them into a false path. Father Schall
died miserably at the age of seventy-eight, after having been for
thirty-seven years the trusted and favoured servant of five emperors.
His converts were degraded, and his colleagues imprisoned or banished.

Among those who were held in chains, beaten, and subjected to every
indignity, was Father Verbiest, a native of Flanders, partly educated
at Seville, the third of the great triad of priests who, by their
talents, their learning, and their personal charm, so nearly succeeded
in turning the current of Chinese history. For six long years who
shall say what he suffered? Six years of the horrors of a Chinese
prison! At last, however, the minority of the Emperor Ka̔ng Hsi came
to an end. He had not forgotten the good teaching of Father Schall,
and one of his earliest acts, on assuming the power in 1671, was to
release the priests, with Father Verbiest at their head. Ka̔ng Hsi was
not a Christian; but though he forbade his subjects to follow the new
teaching, he was sufficiently liberal to put an end to persecution, and
to recognise the value of Western learning. There is a myth to the
effect that an earthquake was the immediate cause of the release, but
the truth is that the Emperor wanted Verbiest’s astronomical science
to set straight the crooked inventions of the native professors. The
father was appointed court astronomer and chief mathematician. He was
also ordered, as Schall had been, to cast cannon, which, with much
pomp and ceremony, robed as for mass, he blessed, in the presence of
the court, sprinkling them with holy water, and giving to each the
name of a female saint which he had himself drawn on the breech. This
brought him a letter from Pope Innocent XI., praising him for having
so wisely brought the profane sciences into play for the salvation of
Chinese souls. To Father Verbiest are due the wonderful mathematical
instruments of bronze, beautiful as works of art, which are still one
of the sights of Peking. They are in the Observatory at the southern
corner of the Tartar city, where they remain as the last witnesses of
the Jesuit greatness. Verbiest died in 1688, and the Emperor himself
composed the funeral oration, which was read with great pomp before
his coffin. No three men ever succeeded in obtaining the favour of
the Chinese court so signally as the three Jesuit fathers, Ricci,
Schall, and Verbiest. When Father Verbiest died there was no man with
a sufficiently commanding intellect to fill his place and continue his
work.

It is conceivable that if they had not been thwarted by the Dominicans
and the Franciscans, the Jesuits might have succeeded in their
ambition even to the extent of Christianising China. But those two
sects effectually put a stop to the process of conversion. The great
bone of contention was the so-called worship of ancestors and of
Confucius. Another point was the translation of the name of God by
Ti̔en, literally Heaven, and Shang Ti, for which there is indeed no
other rendering. This last controversy, which has in it much that is
childish, and mere splitting of hairs, is not worth discussing. The
great point was to render the Sacred Name by some term that should
be intelligible to the Chinese mind. Both seemed to fulfil that
condition. As regards the former question, we have seen how Father
Ricci dealt with it. He saw the wisdom of not repelling the Chinese
by at once condemning a custom to which they were so wedded that any
attempt to do away with it would evidently alienate them altogether,
so he, a true Jesuit, effected a clever compromise, treating the rites
in honour of ancestors and of Confucius as civil and not as religious
ceremonies. It always has seemed to me that he acted wisely, for in no
other way could he have hoped to obtain any hearing. By degrees the
Christianised Chinese might have been weaned from their old practices,
and Christianity in all its purity have been made a dominant religion.
This, however, is mere speculation.

When the Dominicans and Franciscans became aware of the successes of
the Jesuits, they too resolved to have their share in the work, and
they promptly sent out missions to China on their own account. But
their school lacked the liberality and plastic nature of the Jesuits.
They resolutely refused any compromise. They accused the Jesuits
of countenancing idolatry and heathen practices, and one Morales, a
Spanish Dominican, sent home a report to the Propaganda to that effect.
This produced a decree from Pope Innocent the Tenth, in which the
conduct of the Jesuits was censured and their doctrine condemned in
1645. It took the Jesuits eleven years to procure from Pope Alexander
VII. another Bull, not indeed contradicting that of Pope Innocent, but
one which might be so read as to give them a free hand. But the battle
was not over, for in 1693 Bishop Maigrot, Vicar Apostolic in China,
declared in the face of the Inquisition and the Pope that Ti̔en meant
the material heaven, and not God, and that the worship of ancestors was
idolatrous. In this difficulty it is not a little strange to find that
the Jesuits appealed to the Emperor Ka̔ng Hsi to show them the way out.
They addressed him in a memorial which is quoted at length by Wells
Williams from the _Life of St. Martin_, and which is so curious that I
am tempted to transcribe it, the more so as it shows so clearly all
the points of the great controversy:—

“We, your faithful subjects, although originally from distant
countries, respectfully supplicate your Majesty to give us clear
instructions on the following points. The scholars of Europe have
understood that the Chinese practise certain ceremonies in honour
of Confucius; that they offer sacrifices to Heaven, and that they
observe peculiar rites towards their ancestors; but persuaded that
these ceremonies, sacrifices, and rites are founded in reason, though
ignorant of their true intention, earnestly desire us to inform them.
We have always supposed that Confucius was honoured in China as a
legislator, and that it was in this character alone, and with this view
solely, that the ceremonies established in his honour were practised.
We believe that the rites in honour of ancestors are only observed in
order to exhibit the love felt for them, and to hallow the remembrance
of the good received from them during their life. We believe that
the sacrifices offered to Heaven are not tendered to the visible
heavens which are seen above us, but to the Supreme Master, Author,
and Preserver of heaven and earth, and of all they contain. Such are
the interpretation and the sense which we have always given to these
Chinese ceremonies; but as strangers cannot be considered competent
to pronounce on these important points with the same certainty as the
Chinese themselves, we presume to request your Majesty not to refuse to
give us the explanations which we desire concerning them. We wait for
them with respect and submission.”

Ka̔ng Hsi cut the Gordian knot by declaring that “Ti̔en means the true
God, and that the customs of China are political.” In spite of this
Imperial opinion Pope Clement XI. upheld Bishop Maigrot, declared that
Ti̔en Chu, Lord of Heaven, must be the name for God, Ti̔en and Shang Ti
being altogether inadmissible.

Tournon, Patriarch of Antioch, was sent to Peking, where at an audience
of Ka̔ng Hsi the Emperor demanded to be informed of the decision of
the Pope. When Ka̔ng Hsi learnt that a Pope of Rome had ventured to
give an opinion contrary to his own in a matter which was altogether
Chinese, and in part purely linguistic, he was furious, and issued
a decree declaring that the Jesuits should be protected, but the
followers of Bishop Maigrot should be persecuted. The Patriarch Tournon
was banished to Macao, where further difficulties arose between him
and the bishop of that diocese, who went so far as to imprison the
legate in a private house, where he died. A second legate was sent to
Peking in 1715 in the person of one Mezzabarba. Ka̔ng Hsi received
him civilly, but would not talk about rites, and after six years
fruitlessly spent he returned to Europe.

At the beginning of the eighteenth century it is claimed that there
were in the provinces of the two Chiangs alone one hundred churches
and a hundred thousand Christians. Those were the palmy days of
missionary enterprise, but they did not last long. The quarrels of the
missionaries amongst themselves, their political ambitions, which it
was represented constituted a danger to the state, disgusted Ka̔ng Hsi.
The Jesuits, indeed, he continued to tolerate, forbidding any priests
but those who would follow the rules of Ricci to remain in China. In
1723 Ka̔ng Hsi died, and was succeeded by his son Yung Chêng, who in
the following year issued an edict strictly forbidding the propagation
of the Christian religion. A few missionaries were retained at Peking
on account of their scientific acquirements, but the majority were
banished to the south. The native Christians in the north were left
as a flock without shepherds; they were subjected to extortion and
blackmailing of the worst description, and although many remained
faithful and even contrived to harbour their teachers secretly, this
edict of Yung Chêng gave the death-blow to an energy which had made
itself powerfully felt for a century and a quarter.

I have been led further afield than I intended in this sketch of the
Jesuit enterprise (based mainly upon Dr. Wells Williams’s book and on
the _Biographie Universelle_), but it is a fascinating subject, and
few people outside of those personally interested in China know how
nearly at one time the Christian religion seemed to be reaching a great
triumph. The story of Ricci, Schall, and Verbiest teaches one great
truth. If missionaries are to be successful it must be by the power of
masterly talent and knowledge. They can only work on any scale through
the lettered class, and in order to dominate them must be able to give
proof of superior attainments as the old Jesuits did. With courage,
devotion, self-sacrifice, our missionaries are largely endowed. They
have given proofs of these, even to the laying down of their lives; but
these qualities are as nothing in the eyes of the cultivated Confucian.
One such convert as Schall’s friend Sü and his daughter Candida would
do more towards Christianising China than thousands of poor peasants.
To make such a convert needs qualifications which are rare indeed.
Above all things an accurate and scholarly knowledge of the language
is necessary. There have been not a few excellent scholars among our
missionaries. But there are many more whose ignorance in that respect
has been fatal, covering themselves and the religion which they
preach with ridicule. Fancy a Chinese Buddhist mounting on the roof
of a hansom cab at Charing Cross and preaching Buddhism to the mob in
pidgin English! That would give some measure of the effect produced
on a Chinese crowd by a missionary whom I have seen perched upon a
cart outside the great gate of the Tartar City at Peking, haranguing
a yellow crowd of gapers in bastard Chinese, delivered with a strong
Aberdonian accent. The Jesuits knew better than that.

Not an uncommon argument in support of the truths of Christianity is to
call attention to the purity of the lives of the missionaries. I find
a note of a conversation on this subject in my Journals. “Venerable
sir,” answered the learned and respectable Kung, “the goodness of a
dumpling does not depend upon the pucker at the top of it. You can no
more judge a man’s merits by his outward seeming than you can mete out
the sea in a bushel measure. It is true that to all appearance your
missionaries lead very pure lives; but to all appearance so do our
people. Look at Mr. Li and Mr. Pao, who live in my street. Nothing can
be more respectable than their outward demeanour, yet we know perfectly
well that Mr. Li sleeps in flowers and closes his eyes in willows” (a
metaphorical expression for leading a dissolute life), “while as for
Mr. Pao, the less said about him the better. What guarantee have I that
these men, whose excellence you extol, are not like my neighbours Li
and Pao? Since I must doubt even that which passes before my eyes, how
can I believe that which comes to me only by hearsay? The proverb says,
‘If your front teeth are knocked out, swallow them.’ Nobody publishes
his own misfortune or his own disgrace.”

The Chinaman knew his own country well. Virtue without the supremest
power of science and education is not enough to carry conviction to the
man of letters.

At any rate, the history of the great Jesuit movement proves my
point that the spirit of religious intolerance is not a fault which
can fairly be laid to the charge of “The Hundred Names,” as the οἱ
πολλοί of China call themselves, and that where it has shown itself
it has been engendered and fostered by the fears of the officials. It
is the same with trade. The rulers and not the ruled are the authors
of all difficulties. The Chinaman is a born trader. Buying, selling,
and barter are the very joy of his life, and so long as he can get the
better of a bargain what cares he with whom he deals? Foreigner or
fellow-countryman, it is all one to him.

The third source to which hatred of foreigners is ascribed is opium.
That has been dealt with so recently by a Royal Commission that there
is nothing new to be said upon the subject. All I can say, speaking
from personal observation, is that I have known some hundreds of
Chinese of all classes who were opium smokers. None of them abused
the drug. They regarded it as a most valuable prophylactic against
fever and ague, and would have been very loth to do without it. Some
were literary men and officials doing hard brainwork; others, like a
travelling pedlar whom I met on one of my Mongolian excursions, were
doing equally hard bodily work. The abuse of opium has, so far as I
can judge, been grossly exaggerated. It cannot be denied that there
are to be seen in the opium dens of great cities a few poor wretches
who have reduced themselves to a state of abject degradation by their
intemperance; but their percentage must be small indeed compared
to that of the victims of alcohol who are the disgrace of our own
towns, and at any rate, as has been cunningly observed, they do not
go home and beat their wives. To deprive the Chinaman of the finest
qualities of Indian opium would be to condemn him to the use of the
miserable substitute which he grows in his own fields. It would be
like forbidding the importation of champagne and Château Lafitte into
England, and driving our epicures and invalids to the necessity of
falling back upon cheap and nasty stimulants. If the opium trade were
to be abolished to-morrow it is my firm conviction that it would
spring up again immediately, but under altered conditions and in
native hands. If it be thought that I am wrong in what I say as to
the use of opium, read what Dr. Morrison says in his delightful book,
_An Australian in China_. There you have the independent testimony of
a competent physician who has travelled over the whole of China from
east to west, and who has dealt exhaustively with the question. No one
has had better opportunities of judging. No opinion is worthy of more
respect.

My conclusion then is that neither the religion of the missionaries,
nor the trade of the merchants, nor even the much-abused drug, can
honestly be counted as the cause of the anti-foreign movement in
China, though one and all have been used as levers to envenom it.
Foreign intercourse in any shape is the bugbear of the mandarin, as
being the one standing danger threatening abolition of himself and
his privileges, of which the two most dearly prized are robbery and
cruelty.

Let us be just, however, even to the mandarin. It often happens that
the missionaries are surrounded by natives of bad character, who hang
on to them for protection. Especially is this the case with certain
Roman Catholics, who have always endeavoured to “extra-territorialise”
their converts, that is, to exact for them the same privileges of
immunity from Chinese jurisdiction as are granted to the subjects of
their own country. It is easy to see how this may give just cause of
offence to the officials, and how readily a cunning malefactor will
run to his priest to shelter his back from the bamboo rod, swearing
that the charge brought against him is a mere pretext, his profession
of the Christian faith, in which he is protected by treaty, being the
real offence. Full of righteous indignation and confidence in the truth
of his convert, who, being a Christian, must necessarily be believed
before his heathen accuser, the priest rushes off to the magistrate’s
office to plead the cause of his protégé. The magistrate finds the
man guilty and punishes him; the priest is stout in his defence; a
diplomatic correspondence ensues, and on both sides the vials of wrath
are poured out. How can a priest who interferes, and the mandarin who
is interfered with, love one another? Some instances there have been
where the priests have gone a step farther, and have actually urged
their disciples to own no allegiance to their native authorities, but
to obey only themselves as representatives of the Sovereign Pontiff of
Rome.

The missionaries, on the other hand, of the China Inland Mission put
forth no such pretensions, and excite no such animosities.

The jealousies of the different sects of Christianity among themselves
throw as great difficulties in the way of conversion to-day as they did
in Ka̔ng Hsi’s time. A highly-educated Chinese gentleman, who had been
making inquiries into the doctrines of Christianity, once appealed to
me on the subject. “How is it,” he asked, “that if I go to one teacher
and talk to him of what I have learnt from another he answers me, ‘No,
that is not right; that is the doctrine preached by So-and-So; if you
follow him you will go to hell’?” But that one missionary should speak
of the Church of another Christian as a “Scarlet Woman” appeared to him
to be altogether lacking in decorum. It must be a puzzle—yet not worse
than the various schools of Buddhism.

It used to be a cardinal article of faith among Europeans in China
during the fifties, that if once we could throw Peking open to foreign
diplomacy all would be well. That was to be the sovereign cure for
all the ills of which we had to complain. We should be in touch with
the Emperor and his court, and we could not fail to convert the most
recalcitrant of mandarins to the adoption of our Western civilisation:
perhaps even China might become a Christian country. We have now been
at Peking for forty years, during which time successive ministers of
all countries have preached, flattered, scolded, and threatened over
the sweetmeats and tea of the Tsung-Li Yamên, and what is the result
to-day?

What really was wanted was not to get into Peking ourselves, but to
get the Emperor with his court and Government out of it. This is no
new theory of mine. So confident have I always been that Peking is the
worst capital on all grounds for China, that thirty years ago, writing
in _Macmillan’s Magazine_ of the Tientsing massacre in 1870, I said,
“This time we hope that the past will be a lesson for the future, and
that such conditions will be imposed as will secure our countrymen,
be they laymen or missionaries, from outrage, and will prevent China
from remaining the one bar to the progress and civilisation of the
world. It is not within the province of a magazine article to suggest
what those conditions should be; but we cannot help hinting that if
the treaty powers were to treat China as Peter the Great did Russia,
and transplant the capital and court from Peking back to Nanking,
whence it was removed by the Emperor Tai Tsung, who reigned under
the style of Yung Lo at the beginning of the fifteenth century, the
headquarters of obstructiveness and mandarinism would be destroyed,
the power of the viceroys would be brought under the control of the
central Government, and a new era might be inaugurated which should
be as conducive to the welfare and happiness of the Chinese people
as to the safety and profits of the European trader. Above all, the
representatives of European powers, instead of being boxed up in Peking
like rats in a trap, would in the not improbable event of their having
from time to time certain demands and requisitions to make of the
Chinese Government, be backed up by the presence of their men of war
on the spot. It is wonderful how distance weakens a threat, and how
wholesomely the sight of power acts upon the Oriental mind.”

Subsequent events have not led me to alter an opinion formed so many
years ago. So long as Peking remains the capital so long will it be
impossible to bring home to the Government certain facts which are
well known to many of the provincial governors, but which only in rare
instances they dare to report to headquarters. It is not conceivable
that, if the Empress Tsŭ Hsi had known what a hornet’s nest she was
stirring, she would have acted as she must have done in encouraging
Prince Tuan and the Boxers. But it is a far cry to Peking.

It cannot be said that the policy of foreign governments in China
has been calculated to raise the powers in the estimate of those
very Chinese whom it ought to be our chief duty to impress. Take the
outrages upon missionaries and the constant murders of which we have
had to complain—until the German Emperor seized Kwei Chao we have
always been content to accept a money indemnity as reparation; so
that the local mandarins must have looked upon the death of a few
missionaries—the most sweet-smelling offering that could be made to
Tsŭ Hsi and her eunuchs—as a mere question of cost, and that moreover
not to be defrayed by themselves, but squeezed out of the people. If
some poor wretch or wretches were decapitated, the instigator, the real
culprit, could enjoy the luxury of sitting in judgment over his own
crime, and sentencing to death some victim caught at random out of the
prisons, or perhaps even—for Chinese methods are ingenious—paying off
an old score.

As regards intercourse with the ruling classes, or obtaining
any influence with the court, our presence at Peking has been
useless—perhaps worse than useless, actually mischievous. For what can
a Chinese gentleman think when he sees the filthiest beggar pass freely
without let or hindrance in parts of the city where the presence of the
minister of the proudest nation in Europe would be deemed a pollution?
We have been tolerated in Peking as a necessary evil—accepted we have
never been. The receptions at court have been so rare, and made such
a great favour of, that they have been a mere farce, and in some
cases, such as the visit of the ladies of the _Corps diplomatique_
to the Empress Tsŭ Hsi, a degradation. Compare with the position of
the British Minister at Peking—stoned and insulted in the streets,
and unable to obtain protection or redress—the reception of Li Hung
Chang by all Europe three years ago. How that astute old intriguer
must have laughed in his sleeve when he found himself petted, coaxed,
and flattered, treated like a royal personage! and what must have been
the inference drawn by every ignorant Chinese, from Tsŭ Hsi and the
poor down-trampled Emperor Kwang Hsu down to the meanest beggar on the
bridge? Crystal is not so clear as the fact that the Son of Heaven is
the ruler of the world, and all other monarchs mere vassals, doing
homage to the steps of the Jasper Throne.

Peking has exercised upon foreign representatives a sort of unholy
glamour. They have been bewitched. Some have fallen down and worshipped
before its scholastic and historical traditions; others have treated
the great city and its rulers as a sort of gigantic “curio”; optimism
has been the bane of all. If any serious attempt has been made to bring
the mandarins into the pale of statesmanship it has been singularly
unsuccessful. They remain as retrograde and as hopelessly obstructive
as ever. They have occasionally been clever enough, like Li, to throw
dust in the eyes of foreigners, and that is all. Unless a radical
change is effected European diplomacy will continue to be abortive; to
effect that change it is absolutely necessary that the court should be
removed from the headquarters of obstruction, and brought into actual
contact with our civilisation and with the material evidence of Western
power. The old-world prejudices of Moscow were a hindrance to Peter the
Great; the Kugés buried for centuries at Kiyôto were a drag upon the
reformers of Japan; the capitals were moved. These are the two great
precedents for such a policy.

In spite of protesting princes and potentates, it seems as if the
partition of China, that unwieldy monster, was at hand. When the
phrases “Sphere of Influence” and “Hinterland,” diplomatic expressions
recently invented for the benefit of savage Africa, came, three or four
years ago, to be applied to China, then nominally a friendly power,
it was not difficult to foresee what must follow. The events of the
last three months have precipitated matters. Germany is in honour
bound to exact exemplary retribution for the murder of her minister,
the deadliest insult that could be offered to a great nation. If she
were minded to take Shantung, where she might establish a flourishing
colony, she would act as a buffer state between Central China and
Russia, who has already to all intents possessed herself of Manchuria,
and has for many a year cast longing eyes upon Chihli; and after all,
if Russia were to annex Chihli with Peking would the world have any
great cause for lamentation? Apart from all other considerations,
Russia with a nucleus of co-religionists in the Albazines, of whom
there is a short account at p. 211 of these letters, would have more in
hand towards Christianising the people than any other nation or sect;
and it seems to me that Peking Russian, and possibly Christian, would
be far better than Peking Chinese, and certainly heathen. If further
encroachment were guarded against by Germany in Shantung we should not
be losers. Should France want a rectification of frontier for her
great Asiatic colony—why should we interfere? The restoration of the
old frontier of Burmah and the freedom of the Yangtze region should
suffice us.

As for a change of dynasty in China, which some writers are crying for,
that is an impossibility, because there is no Chinese pretender ready
to replace the Manchus. It would mean chaos such as the world has never
seen.

Freed from the incubus of the Empress Tsŭ Hsi and her eunuchs, freed
from Prince Tuan and the other bloodguilty Manchus, the Emperor,
surrounded by a more enlightened court, and acting under capable
advisers, would be enabled to rule peacefully and honestly over an
immense and prosperous empire; while the removal of the capital would,
without any act of vandalism, such as the suggested destruction of the
Tombs, read China that lesson which is so sorely needed, and which
the absurd reprisals of 1860 utterly failed to convey. After the
second occupation of Peking we should not again hear of the Barbarians
bringing tribute to the Son of Heaven from his vassals.

The idea of a change of capital is not one that is of itself strange
or repugnant to the Chinese mind. It has even, apparently, been
contemplated by the Dowager-Empress herself, though her choice would
not unnaturally fall upon a spot like Hsi An Fu, near which town, at
Hao, at Hsien Yang, and at Chang An, the emperors of the Chou dynasty
(B.C. 1122–781), the Tsin (B.C. 249–200), and the Sui (A.D. 582–904)
held their courts. But the chief charm of such a capital would be its
inaccessibility and remoteness from the haunts of the foreign devil.
Hsi An Fu would be Peking over again, and worse. It would give the
_coup de grâce_ to all hope of civilising the court.

In a letter published in the _Times_ newspaper of June 22 I advocated
once more the choice of Nanking as a new seat of Government, and I
said that such a change would be hailed with joy by many millions of
Chinese. A few days after that letter appeared my arguments received
a very remarkable confirmation. A telegram from Yokohama informed us
that the Chinese community in Japan, a highly intelligent, educated,
and respectable body of men, of first-rate business capacity, had
presented a petition urging the foreign powers to take advantage of
the settlement which must follow upon the present troubles, to insist
upon the removal of the capital from Peking to Nanking. Now these men
know what they are talking about. They know that such a change would
work wonders in the direction of good government; that it would take
the power out of the fossilised hands of the court; that the light of
day would be fatal to the bats and owls of the forbidden city; that the
secret societies would be deprived of their chief support; that the
viceroys and the whole descending scale of mandarins, brought under
control of an intelligible and intelligent Government, would no longer
be able to squeeze and persecute the people, paralysing trade by their
extortions and blackmailing, and setting up insuperable barriers to the
progress of civilisation.

In the Blue Book published recently (July 30) we have the first
instalment of the official history of the tragedy of Peking—most
melancholy reading, truly! But there is one bright spot in this
miserable record. The attitude of our Foreign Office in all the
negotiations which have taken place appears to have been altogether
admirable. In spite of the cold water thrown by international
jealousies upon Lord Salisbury’s efforts to retrieve the situation, he
has held his own position, and he has succeeded in using the best means
which were available without in any way compromising the future. Japan
is to furnish troops, but there are no vague promises, no encouragement
of inordinate ambitions, and no raising of hopes, which, if realised,
might be fraught with dangers beside which even the horrors of the last
few weeks would be as child’s play. Lord Salisbury boldly promises to
find the money, and England will honour his bill. That is all. “Her
Majesty’s Government wish to draw a sharp distinction between immediate
operations which may be still in time to save the Legations, and any
ulterior operations which may be undertaken.” No language could be
clearer or more satisfactory than this. Is it too much to hope that
when the final settlement comes, the counsels of the same master-mind
may devise a solution which shall bring about a happier era for China,
without endangering the harmony of those nations which are now united
in their resentment of outrages, for which the history of the world
finds no parallel?

Besides the Blue Book, recent events have produced a plentiful crop
of letters to the newspapers, many of them written with great ability
and knowledge of Chinese affairs. The deposition of the undoubtedly
guilty Empress, and the restoration to power of the Emperor, with a
Government composed of the progressive party to which he is inclined,
are with most of the writers a _sine qua non_. To this I say Amen. “The
murderer Tuan must be executed” is a favourite cry. By all means; but
we know what is the first postulate in the cooking of a hare. Prince
Tuan will hardly be more easy to catch than was Nana Sahib in 1857.
If the Emperor, a weakling at best, be left at Peking in a hotbed of
harem intrigues and secret societies, how can he be protected? Will
his life be worth many days’ purchase? Will a progressive ministry be
able to exercise any authority over the great provincial satraps? The
foreign representatives will be locked up in the old death-trap, and in
ten, twenty, thirty years history will repeat itself. The inviolable
sanctity of Legations with such surroundings becomes a most miserable
farce.

The return to the _status quo ante_, with all its possibility of
tragic repetitions, is just the sort of lame and impotent conclusion
to which we have accustomed the Chinese, and in their dealings with us
they count upon a moderation which, like all Asiatics, they construe
into fear, and despise accordingly. A barren conquest like that of
1860, which left things as they were, is something which they cannot
understand. When Li Hung Chang, who knows exactly what string it
is best to harp upon, sweetly urges us to arouse “the gratitude of
millions” by abstention from revenge, be sure his gentle mind sees its
way to turn such magnanimity to good account. The horrors of to-day
were begotten of the mistakes of 1860 and 1870. Let us hope that 1900
may be the parent of a less ill-omened brood.

                                  ————

Those who desire to study the political problems of the Far East will
find admirable instruction in Mr. Chirol’s the _Far Eastern Question_
(Macmillan), in Mr. Colquhoun’s _Overland to China_, and in the same
writer’s more recently published _The Problem in China and British
Policy_.

My best thanks are due to the proprietors of the _Times_ newspaper for
permission to reproduce here their admirable plan of Peking.




                                LETTER I


                                       HONG-KONG, _23rd April 1865_.

Life at sea may be a very pleasant one for those who like it, but I
doubt whether any one ever arrived at the end of a voyage of a month
and a half by one of the P. and O. Co.’s steamers without uttering an
expression of thanksgiving, hearty and sincere. The monotony of the
ever-recurring daily occupations is killing. However,

    Be the day weary or be the day long,
    At length it ringeth to evensong,—

even Hong-kong is reached at last.

We rush up on deck after breakfast to see the first of the brown,
sun-scorched island. It is shrouded in mist, however, and there is
not much to look at. But every one is excited and flurried, and
in the happiness of realising the luxury of being on land, we
feel kindly towards all mankind, and bid a cordial farewell to our
fellow-passengers. In a short while we are in harbour, and the little
colony, planted at the foot of wild and rugged hills matching those
of the mainland opposite, lies before us. A crowd of boats plying for
hire, and partly manned, to use a bull, by women often pulling away
lustily with a baby slung across their backs, hail us with cries of
“Wanchee boat?” “Wanchee big boat?” These Chinese boatwomen are real
wonders. Hardy, strong, and burnt by the sun, they look and probably
are as sturdy as any of the men. At any rate I saw one woman fight and
thrash a couple of stalwart young boatmen; and a good stand-up fight
it was, give and take. They did not spare her, and she belaboured them
most lustily, screaming and chattering all the while in a way that
would have frightened Billingsgate itself into silence. The boats seem
to hold whole families,—even the nursery,—the small boys wearing corks
or bottles to keep them afloat when they tumble overboard. The girls,
being reckoned of no value, take their chance, and wear nothing to
protect them. As soon as we came to an anchor the boats of the great
commercial firms came alongside, each probably steered by a partner
eager to hear the latest news or to welcome a friend. One by one the
passengers disappear, and he who has letters for one of the merchant
princes of China may look forward to luxurious quarters and a warm
welcome, for nowhere else is hospitality carried to such an extent as
it is here.

The houses in Hong-kong are large and airy. Lofty and spacious rooms
not overloaded with furniture (for everything is dispensed with an
eye to the getting the most air and coolness) look out on to a broad
verandah, which is shaded with green rush blinds to keep out the glare.
Here bamboo lounging chairs, of indescribable comfort, hold out arms
that invite one to doze away the sultry afternoon, or sit smoking a
cheroot and sipping cool drinks in the most luxurious laziness. The
clean and neat matting on the floors, the rare curiosities and jars
which decorate the principal rooms, the quiet, mouse-like steps of
the China boys in their blue dresses, who act as servants, coming in
to take an order or deliver a message in their quaint pidgin English,
give a peculiar and original stamp to the whole, which is of itself
immensely refreshing. Everything speaks of rest and quiet, and yet it
is in these quiet, idle-seeming houses—very castles of Indolence they
appear—that busy brains are at work, toiling all day, calculating rises
and falls, watching chances by which thousands are won or lost in a
day. In the old days when the opium trade was unlawful, and therefore
at its height, when the rival houses had each their fast sailing
clippers racing against one another from Bombay and Calcutta, and the
first to arrive would lie hidden round the corner of the bay, and send
a man on shore across the hills with the all-important intelligence,
only showing itself when a price had been made, the life of a man
of business at Hong-kong must have been one of untold excitement.
Nowadays every man gets his letters by the mail, the opium trade is
legitimatised, and there is no longer the same amount of “go” and dash
about the thing. Still, a venture of tea to the tune of a million of
dollars, upon which 40 or 50 per cent may be made or lost, must be
exciting enough for most men. Just at present the China trade is in
a singularly bad way; vast sums have been lost in tea speculations;
some of the larger houses have been very hard hit, but with plenty
of capital at their backs have stood the shock well. Smaller firms,
however, not having the same elasticity, have sunk under it; smashes
and rumours of smashes are rife; and the only men who have not suffered
are those who, with wise prescience, have folded their hands and done
nothing, waiting for better times.

Hong-kong presents perhaps one of the oddest jumbles in the whole
world. It is neither fish, flesh, fowl, nor good red-herring. The
Government and principal people are English—the population are
Chinese—the police are Indians—the language is bastard English mixed
with Cantonese—the currency is the Mexican dollar, and the elements no
more amalgamate than the oil and vinegar in a salad. The Europeans hate
the Chinese, and the latter return the compliment with interest. In the
streets Chinamen, Indian policemen, Malays, Parsees, and half-castes
jostle up against Europeans, naval and military officers, Jack-tars,
soldiers, and loafers of all denominations. Constantinople, Smyrna,
and Cairo show more picturesque and varied crowds, but nothing can be
more grotesque than the street life of Hong-kong. The local cab is a
green chair[3] open in front and covered in at the top, in which you
may sit Yankeewise, with your feet sprawling above your head, and be
carried along at a good pace by a couple of strong-shouldered coolies
with shaven polls, long tails, and huge umbrella hats. Plenty of these
are waiting for hire at every corner. They have a fixed tariff of ten
cents the trip. The weights that these coolies carry slung on their
bamboo-poles are something surprising. I have seen Turkish hamals
bent nearly double under the most impossible loads, such as no London
railway porter would look at; but it makes one’s shoulders ache to see
the Chinamen fetch and carry, for they do not hold the poles in their
hands with the support of a shoulder-strap, like the chairmen who used
to take old ladies out to tea and scandal in English country towns,
but the bamboo poles are fastened at the ends, and the men simply
hoist them on to their shoulders and stagger off under them. Both men
and women of the lower orders are certainly to our eyes mightily
ill-favoured, and have villainous countenances which, if all tales
be true, do not belie their characters; but now and then one comes
across a pretty creature enough, some Cantonese, probably, as frail as
fair—for St. Antony is not generally worshipped in seaside garrison
towns. The long plaited tails worn by the men, and eked out with silk
until they reach nearly to the heels, are a never-ending source of
wonder to the new-comer. But there is one fashion of shaving the poll,
leaving here and there a hair like the bristles on a gooseberry, which
is peculiarly droll in its effect—a “coiffure à la groseille.” The
Chinaman is very careful of his tail, and no cat has a greater horror
of wetting her coat than he has of a drop of rain falling on his back
hair. To cut it off is the height of indignity; and when the Chinese
sailors on board the P. and O. ships have been stealing opium from
the cargo, which they find it very hard to keep their hands off, they
are tied up by their tails to the capstan and summarily flogged; in
which case they become useful as well as ornamental. The barber drives
a brisk trade; nor does he confine himself to shaving, clipping, and
plaiting; he has also cunning instruments with which he cleans the
eyes and ears of his clients, the result of which is that the drums
of their ears are often injured, and the poor patients afflicted with
chronic deafness.

In this island of contrasts none is greater than that between the
European and Chinese quarters of the town. In the former the houses
are large and well built of gray slate-coloured bricks and fine
granite, and others, some of which will be real palaces, are in course
of construction. In the latter, on the contrary, the houses are low
and mean. They are generally built with one story: on the ground
floor is the shop with its various goods and quaint perpendicular
inscriptions and advertisements; on the first floor, which is thrown
out over the footway and supported by wooden posts, so as to form a
covered walk, the family live, and here the ugly old women—uglier
in China than anywhere—and queer little yellow children may be seen
peering out of their dens at the passers-by. Towards evening, when the
paper lanterns are lighted and the shops are shut up, not by doors
and shutters as with us, but by a sort of cage of bamboo poles,
through which the interior is visible, the Chinese house looks very
fantastic and strange. This quarter of the town bears a very bad name.
It swarms with houses of the worst repute, and low grog-shops which
are largely patronised by the sailors. The coolies in the street are
a most ruffianly looking lot, not pleasant to meet in a by-road alone
and unarmed. Indeed, life and property seem to be by no means so safe
in the colony as they should be, considering the force which is kept
here. A short time since a gentleman was attacked in broad daylight in
the middle of the town, knocked down and robbed; and it is downright
dangerous to venture on the hills alone without the moral influence of
a revolver. The Chinamen are very clever thieves and housebreakers, and
will even venture into barracks, smuggle themselves into the officers’
quarters, burn a little opium under the nose of some sleeping hero,
and in double-quick time clear the room of watch, chain, loose cash,
and valuables. Sometimes, however, they get caught. The other night a
young officer was too quick for one of these light-fingered gentlemen,
and pinned him just as he was making off. A mighty pretty dressing
he got too—for when the officers were tired of thrashing him, with
ingenious cruelty they turned him into the lock-up where the drunken
soldiers were, and I leave you to guess what sort of a night he spent.
It is said that a Hindoo will rob a man of the sheet he is sleeping on
without disturbing him, but I think to clear the goods out of a large
warehouse under the owner’s nose, and with the police looking on, is
at least as great a feat. This happened in this wise. A “godown” or
storehouse full of valuable goods was fixed upon, a number of coolies
walked in one fine day with a “comprador” (headman, bailiff, steward,
and factotum), and with the utmost innocence set to work emptying the
place, the pretended comprador all the while, in the most businesslike
manner, making notes of the bales which were sent down to the quay
and shipped off in small boats. One coolie is so like another that no
wonder the policeman who was standing by thought it was all right, and
the very audacity of the robbery put him off his guard. By the time the
theft was discovered, goods, coolies, and comprador were well out of
reach, and the owner was left lamenting over his empty godown.

It is rather hard on a man when he first comes to these parts to
have to learn a new dialect of his own language more bizarre than
broad Somersetshire, more unintelligible than that of Tennyson’s
northern farmer. This is the Cantonese or “pidgin” English. Pidgin
means business, of which word it is not difficult to see that it is a
corruption, and the jargon is the _patois_ that has invented itself
for transacting affairs with the natives. Use a plain English word to
a Chinaman, and he will stare and “no sabé”; but distort it, add a
syllable or two, put it in its wrong place, and, in short, make it so
unlike itself that its own root would not acknowledge it, and he will
catch your meaning at once. Several Chinese, Portuguese, and other
words of doubtful pedigree, mixed up with this maltreated English, make
up the lingo, which is a literal translation of Chinese syntax, and
puzzling enough at first. Here is a specimen. I should tell you that in
pidgin bull is _male_, cow _female_. An English gentleman from Shanghai
went to call at a friend’s house in Hong-kong. The door was opened
by the head Chinese boy. “Mississee have got?” said the gentleman.
“Have got,” answered the boy, “but just now no can see.” “How fashion
no can see?” The boy answered, grinning from ear to ear, “Last night
have catchee one number one piecee bull chilo!” The lady of the house
had been safely brought to bed during the night of a fine baby boy!
Sometimes the boy will dot his I’s and cross his T’s with unfortunate
distinctness as to the occupations in which his master or mistress is
engaged, putting one in mind of Gavarni’s _Enfants Terribles_. It is
not to be wondered at that the coolies and servant boys should talk
this lingo, but that clever, intelligent fellows like the compradors in
big houses should not have acquired a better form of English is indeed
strange.

Life at Hong-kong passes away pleasantly enough. The residents are very
rich, and they spend their money like princes. Their hospitality is
boundless, and open house is the rule. I can fancy no better quarters
for a naval or military man. The climate is very different from what
it used to be, and has become very healthy; but if a man should fall
ill he can get away north to Peking, or run up to Japan, or choose
between a dozen trips nearer at hand. The usual daily routine here at
this season of the year is as follows:—At six your boy wakes you with
a cup of tea; you rise and bathe, and read or write till it is time to
dress for breakfast at twelve (the merchants, of course, go to their
offices at ten or even much earlier). Breakfast, as it is called, is a
regular set meal with several courses, and champagne or claret; any one
comes in who pleases, and is sure of a cordial welcome, and probably an
invitation to return to dinner. After a cup of coffee and a cheroot,
office work begins again, and goes on until about five, when every one
turns out to ride, drive, or walk until seven, which is the hour for
gossip, and sherry and bitters at the club, a first-rate establishment
to which strangers are admitted as visitors, and where a man may put
up if he pleases. Dinner is at eight, and a very serious affair it is,
for Hong-kong is fond of good living and fine vintages; and this rule
does not apply only to the heads of houses, for their clerks are lodged
and boarded exactly on the same scale as themselves, and a boy who has
been content to dine for a shilling at a London chop-house, sits down
here to a dinner fit for a duke, criticises the champagne and claret
with the air of a connoisseur, and rattles in his pocket £300 or £400
a year for his _menus plaisirs_. Which shows the superiority of vulgar
fractions to genteel Latin and Greek.

The rides and drives about Hong-kong are in their way very pretty,
though the almost entire absence of trees presents a violent contrast
to the rich tropical vegetation of Singapore and Penang. On the other
hand, both on the mainland and in the island itself, there are bold,
rugged mountain outlines, often shrouded in a mist that reminds one
of Scotland and Ireland; huge boulders of rock from which beautiful
ferns of every variety (fifty-two species have been classed) grow in
profusion; a bay studded with wild barren islands; and to the east,
where the colony is only separated from the mainland by about a mile of
sea, the picturesque peninsula of Kowloon. The racecourse in the Happy
Valley is a lovely spot. It is surrounded by hills on three sides, and
from the fourth, which is close to the bay, one looks up a blue glen
such as Sir Walter Scott might have described. Here on the slope of
the hill is the cemetery, and here and at Government House there are
some trees, among which the graceful bamboo is conspicuous. But it is
the south-west of the island that is most affected by the residents. At
a place called Pok Fo Lum, about four miles off, several of the rich
merchants have built bungalows to which in summer-time, after stewing
all day in their offices, it is their wont to resort of an afternoon,
and let the fresh sea-breeze clear their brains of tea, opium, silk,
rises and falls, and such-like cobwebs. On a fine evening these gardens
are a very pleasant lounge. At the back rises the Peak, a fine bold
rock some 1700 feet high; all around are sweet-scented tropical flowers
teeming with strange, many-coloured insects and gorgeous butterflies;
while in front the view stretches to the mainland hills across the
brilliant sea rippling against little islands, and covered with
flotillas of native boats, peaceful enough to all appearance, but ever
ready for any little piece of light piracy that may turn up.

I was very anxious before leaving the south of China to see Canton,
and accordingly on the 28th April I started with a friend in one of
the huge house-steamers that ply between Hong-kong and Canton, and
are of themselves curiosities. They are divided into separate parts
for Europeans, Parsees, and natives of the poorer class, with loose
boxes into which bettermost Chinese families are put. You may form
some idea of their size when I tell you that three weeks ago, on the
occasion of a festival, our boat the _Kin Shan_ took up 2063 Chinamen
to Canton, whither they were bound to “chin-chin” the graves of their
ancestors. In all American steamers—and this is a Yankee venture—speed
is the great object, and we accomplished the distance, between 80 and
90 miles, under the six hours.

We had a bright sunny morning for our expedition, and the harbour of
Hong-kong appeared to great advantage, for there were plenty of fleecy
clouds in the sky throwing fantastic shadows over the hills around.
The sea was as calm and transparent as a lake, and we could sit in the
best cabin, which is a huge building on the forecastle, catching every
breath of air, and enjoying the scenery. The river-banks are at first
wild, barren, and hilly, like Hong-kong, but higher up there begin to
be signs of cultivation. Plantains and rice, which is the greenest
of all green grasses, grow in profusion among the snipe marshes.
Bamboos spring up close to the water’s edge, and the hills are lower,
less savage-looking, and more fruitful. Ruined forts, destroyed when
we forced our trade upon the unwilling Chinese, numberless boats and
junks, here and there a pagoda with different sorts of plants peeping
out of its many stories, tell us that we are drawing near a town, and
after about four hours and a half we reach Wampoa, a miserable place,
with about as dirty and degraded-looking a population as could be seen
anywhere. A few lime kilns, soy or ketchup factories, and dry docks
where ships are brought to have their keels cleaned of barnacles and
sea-muck, seem to constitute all the business of the place. I shall
always henceforth look upon soy as the essence of the dirt of Wampoa.

Canton itself does not present a very clean face to be washed by the
unsavoury river. If any one should come here expecting to see a fine
city of quays and palaces, he will be grievously disappointed. Myriads
of low dirty wooden houses, built almost in the very water itself,
are crowded together higgledy piggledy, without order or method. As if
these were not enough, there are whole streets, alleys, and quarters
of the foulest boat-houses, all swarming with human, and probably
other, life. Junks in numbers, carrying guns for defence, and if a safe
opportunity occurs, for offence, are moored in the stream. Strange,
grotesque craft they are, with their huge bows built to represent
the heads of sea-monsters; a great eye is painted on each side, for
the Chinese treat their ships as reasoning beings, and say, “S’pose
no got eye, no can see; s’pose no can see, no can walkee,” which is
unanswerable—even the _Kin Shan_ carries an eye on each paddle-box in
deference to this idea. But as at Hong-kong, the chief peculiarity of
the river scene here is the crowd of small boats with female crews. The
mother pulls the stroke oar, the aunt the bow, and grandmamma is at
the helm with a third. I am sure there must have been several hundreds
of these yellow ladies round the steamer at one time. The parrot-house
at the Zoological Gardens was silence itself by comparison, for hard
work, and strong pulling, have given them lungs of leather. They
all claim acquaintance, and employment on the strength of it. “My
boatee, my boatee, my no see you Cheena side long tim.” We had our
own boat, however, and with patience cleared a way and got to shore.
But no description of the Canton River would be complete without an
allusion to the famous “flower-boats.” Huge, unwieldy barges they
are, moored by the river-side, and tricked out with every paltry
decoration of cheap gilding, paper lanterns, and bizarre ornament that
the Owen Jones of China can invent. These are the temples of Venus.
The priestesses are mostly brown ugly little women in sad-coloured
garments, upon whose flat yellow faces the rosy paint looks even more
ghastly than on Europeans; some are almost pretty, however, and all
have beautiful hands and feet (when the latter have not been wantonly
deformed), indeed this is the one gift of beauty common to all the
Chinese, and the very men-servants who wait upon one have hands kept
delicately clean, and so well formed that many an European lady might
envy them; they have no need to wrap a napkin round their thumbs, nor
to wear white cotton gloves; their taper fingers and filbert nails are
pleasant to look upon. At night, when the lanterns are lighted, and
the tawdriness of the decorations is less offensive, the flower-boats
look gay enough, and they are one of the sights of Canton. The trade
that their denizens ply is not looked upon as disgraceful, nor does it
prevent their marrying respectably afterwards,—at least so it is said.

We had had an empty house placed at our disposal, and we took with
us a servant, a coolie, and a native cook. And this brings me to the
record of a feat. When we arrived at our house we found that the boy in
charge (a “boy,” like the boy in Oliver Twist, may be a very old man)
had gone off to “chin-chin” his ancestors’ graves, a ceremony which,
although our coming had been announced to him, could on no account be
deferred. So there we were at half-past three, without so much as a
scrap of fuel or a gridiron to put upon it. In spite of this we sat
down, four of us, at eight o’clock, to a dinner of mulligatawny soup,
soles, for which the river is famous, three _entrées_, a buffalo’s
hump, like boiled beef idealised, snipes, curried prawns, and a dessert
of plantains, oranges, rose apples, tasting just like rose leaves, and
dried lychees, the whole being decked out in the most excellent taste,
with a profusion of the sweetest scented and most brilliant flowers.
We had our wine with us, and altogether I never sat down to a better
dinner. Could any English servants, arriving at an empty house in
London, have done the same? The Chinese, when they have learnt to cook
after our fashion, are the best _chefs_ in the world. You see the art
requires delicacy of hand, plenty of imagination, and does not involve
a knowledge of perspective, so it just suits their talents.

I am afraid I can give you but a poor description of Canton; the
inventory is too large to be taken in a letter. Mr. Sala or any of the
professed literary appraisers would find matter for at least a chapter
in the bad smells. The streets are very narrow. Three men might walk
abreast in them, and perhaps you might throw in a boy if he was very
tiny indeed. On each side are small, low shops, which throw out such a
multitude of lanterns and perpendicular notices, like the attenuated
ghosts of many-coloured banners, that they look as if a solemn
procession in a pantomime had been changed by a tap of the harlequin’s
wand into a scene of streets and advertisements. As if the gangway
were not narrow enough, hucksters and costermongers, offering every
kind of goods for sale, hold their stalls on each available square foot
of pavement. There are meat stalls, fruit stalls, sweetmeat stalls,
sugar-cane stalls, fish stalls, and what can only be designated as
offal stalls. The yellowest crowd in the world hustles along pell-mell
at a furious rate, for every one is busy and every one is in a hurry.
Coolies carrying every conceivable burden balance-wise, from a load of
timber to a bundle of leeks, rush at one, and it needs a sharp look-out
to steer clear of their bamboo poles. Round the corner, lolling in
his chair, for all the world like one of those “magots” Frenchwomen
are so fond of, a Chinese dignitary is borne along, attended by five
or six policemen in white caps and red tassels, nearly upsetting a
small-footed lady, who has just time to totter out of the way on her
rickety legs. If there is a clear space, you may be sure there is a
doctor or fortune-teller peering into his patient’s mouth, like a groom
examining a horse’s teeth, or tapping his head mysteriously with a fan,
to the wonder of a small gaping circle. Barring in very rare instances
a dog or two—for the wary little beasts seem to know the danger that
they run of being turned into butchers’ meat if they stray out of their
own domain—no animals are to be seen. Beasts of burden are represented
by the men, and beasts of draught there are none; indeed, no carriage,
cart, or costermonger’s barrow could thread its way here. The amount
of industry to be seen in a single street is something surprising.
Carpenters, cobblers, turners, carvers—artisans, in short, of all
guilds, are toiling away for dear life—no one is idle. The butcher
is busy separating the coarser from the finer parts of the meat; the
fishmonger gutting his fish, and setting the entrails carefully on one
side—there is no part too vile or mean, none too dear and delicate to
find a customer. Chow-chow dogs (I saw such a pretty little puppy being
carried off to execution; he looked like a brown spitz, and I felt
inclined to buy his release), birds’ nests, rice-birds, the beccafichi
of China, and all manner of delicacies, are cheek-by-jowl with equally
numerous abominations, not to speak of rats and “such small deer.” The
greengrocers’ are the most tempting of the provision shops; they at
least show nothing offensive, and they make their fruit look to the
greatest advantage, setting oranges, apples, lychees, and vegetables in
curious patterns, while ropes of bananas, leeks, young lettuces, and
other greens hang from the ceiling. Competition is great, and with the
utmost labour it is hard to earn a living, for the two cities, Tartar
and Chinese, with their suburbs, hold an immense population, not to
speak of the thousands who are born, live, and die in the boats, and
have no part or share in the land until they come in for that property
six feet by three, which is the common inheritance. Altogether, taking
both sides of the river, there are probably a million and a half of
inhabitants, of whom not more than one hundred are Europeans.

Until the return of the English to Canton, it used to be a point of
honour with the Chinese at Hong-kong to try and persuade people that
the bombardment of 1856 had not done much damage. If they were asked
whether Yeh’s Palace or Yamên had been injured they would answer,
“Not too muchee; my hab hear they breakee that cup that saucer; that
alloo.” But the fact is that the city still bears the marks of the
punishment it received; considerable spaces have been laid waste by
fire; Yeh’s Yamên has been razed to the ground and its site “annexed”
by the French, who are building a cathedral and Jesuit college upon
it. Notwithstanding the havoc made by shot and shell, however, there
is much to be seen. The Yamêns of the Viceroy, the Governor, and
other high functionaries are standing. I only saw the outsides of
these palaces. They are all pretty much alike. An arched gateway,
with a colossal warrior painted in fresco on either side, faces a
blank wall, on which is drawn the outline of some fabulous monster,
and this appears to be used for notices and announcements; marble
kylins and grotesque beasts adorn the courtyard, which is crowded with
functionaries and dependants. The roofs are fretted into a thousand
quaint designs; but you are as familiar with their style as I am, and
as I shall probably in some future letter have an opportunity of saying
something about the interior of a Chinese officer’s palace, I had
better let the subject alone now.

Of course we went to see the “Temple of Punishments” and that of the
Five Hundred Saints, which last is one of the celebrities of China.
The former is so called from its containing models of all the various
modes which Chinese ingenuity has invented for torturing malefactors.
Guarding the portals are two colossal “josses” or idols, represented
with vermilion faces and a prodigious corpulency. Bits of paper, as
votive offerings, some with inscriptions, but more without, are pinned
or fastened to them by the pious: this is a Chinese method of showing
respect to the graves of their dead, and to their gods. Inside the gate
is a large courtyard, which we found crowded with people; all around
were little tables at which sat fortune-tellers, some young men, others
veterans with scanty beards and enormous tortoise-shell spectacles,
writing as solemnly as judges. Here in bamboo divisions are the dolls
which give the temple its name, and very horrible are the scenes which
they represent; beyond the courtyard is the real joss-house, from which
I carried away a confused idea of tinsel, artificial flowers, scraps of
paper, and gloom.

Far more interesting was the Temple of the Five Hundred Saints. In the
gateway, as in the former case, two josses of stupendous size mount
guard. One is represented as solacing himself with a tune on a kind of
mandoline; and I noticed that many of the scraps of paper with which
he has been “chin-chinned” were cut in the shape of his favourite
instrument. Without let or hindrance we wandered through a maze of
white-washed and neatly-kept cloisters, until we came to the refectory
(for there is a monastery attached to this temple), where we found the
monks at their afternoon meal. Just as we arrived, a tiny musical-toned
bell was sounded, at which signal the brethren rose, and what appeared
to be a short prayer or grace was recited in chorus, after which a
monk of higher rank, preceded by an attendant, left the hall, which
was a square room with long tables, and fenced off from the cloisters
at one end by a low bamboo railing. As soon as the great man was gone
the others fell to at their chopsticks and small bowls with renewed
vigour. The monks wear a long light gray robe, and they shave the whole
head, but in other respects their dress does not differ from that of
laymen. The temple itself is a large hall in which the five hundred,
placed in alleys at right angles, sit facing one another in all their
majesty. They are all of gilt metal or wood, and under life size, if
one may use such a term with regard to idols. They are represented in
every variety of attitude, occupation, and expression. Some are playing
on musical instruments, and are bland; others are evidently preaching,
and are didactic; others are inflicting punishment or doing battle, and
are very fierce; one is performing a difficult act of horsemanship on a
large kylin, while two smaller kylins are looking on in admiration—one
and all are made to look fat and comfortable, with huge paunches.
Before each is placed a small green porcelain pot filled with the ashes
of the joss-sticks which have been burnt in his honour. The monks were
uniformly civil to us, and neither here nor in the Temple of Horrors
was any fee asked or expected; how much better it would be if Europeans
would follow the example of these heathens, and not ask admission fees
in their cathedrals and churches.

You may well imagine that during a first visit to a great Chinese city
everything appeared strange and marvellous, but the greatest wonder of
all was that we should be able to wander hither and thither, intruding
into temples, thrusting our curious noses into every hole and corner,
like ferrets in a rabbit warren, elbowing our way unmolested through
crowds that a very few years ago would have mobbed and brick-batted at
least, and perhaps tortured and murdered by inches, any European that
ventured outside the factories. It seems almost a fatality that now
that the city is safe, and its inhabitants peacefully inclined, the
opening of the Yang-Tse-Chiang should have turned the European traffic
with the interior, of which Canton was formerly the headquarters, into
a new channel. The prosperity of Canton is evident, and very striking.
But it is a native and self-containing prosperity, and in no ways
dependent on Europe, and shows that the Chinese were quite right when
they asserted that they could do very well without us. Just before the
principal English firms withdrew their representatives from the city,
finding that the little business there was to do could be more cheaply
transacted by agents drawing a small percentage, an arrangement was
made with the local government whereby we became the lessees of a
small mud island, which had to be filled in at a great cost, called
Shah-Meen. This was to become the English quarter. The church and
new consular buildings have been erected there, and there are a few
empty bungalows belonging to merchants, but the place does not seem
likely ever to wear a look of great importance; the merchants see no
likelihood of an inducement to return, so Shah-Meen has so far been a
poor bargain.

Not far from Shah-Meen are the pleasure-gardens of a merchant named
Po-Ting-Qua. Terraces, summer-houses, stairs, drawbridges, carp-ponds,
rock-work, and flowers are thrown together most fantastically, exactly
like the gardens that the ladies and gentlemen on teacups and plates
walk about in. The doors are cut out of the walls in quaint shapes,
such as circles, jars, bottles, etc. As the rainy season has set in the
garden was not looking its best, but it was very pretty nevertheless,
although there was a little too much stagnant water about for our
ideas. Lord Bacon in his essay on gardens says: “For fountains they are
a great beauty and refreshment; but pools mar all and make the garden
unwholesome, and full of flies and frogs.” If this is true in England,
how much more does it apply to the East. Such things as flower-beds are
unknown here. The plants grow anyhow, without order or arrangement, but
they are carefully tended, and indeed the whole place was beautifully
kept, and there seemed to be a large staff of gardeners and carpenters,
who play a conspicuous part in a Chinese garden.

You will be wanting to hear about the curiosity shops. I went to
see them, but found nothing but rubbish at outrageous prices. The
Chinese buy up everything good at any price. The dealers carry round
their best things to the native connoisseurs, and put off any trash
upon chance customers, swearing that everything is “oloo and culew,”
old and curious. I bought one small bottle for a few shillings as a
souvenir of Canton, but even if I had had heaps of money, there was no
temptation to spend it. I found an old friend at Canton in the person
of Mr. R., our consul, who was a most amiable cicerone. He has passed
the chief part of his life in China, and is a great authority upon
all matters connected with our relations with the Chinese. He lives
in a fascinatingly picturesque Yamên with quite an extensive garden—a
curiosity in itself,—we spent most of the day together and met for
dinner, either at my quarters or in his beautiful Aladdin’s palace,
every evening.

We returned to Hong-kong on May Day. I found that the P. and O. Co. had
put on an extra steamer, to start on Thursday the 4th, so I determined
not to wait for the mail, but to start for Shanghai without delay. This
prevents me from making a trip to Macao, which is par excellence _the_
“outing” from Hong-kong. But as the rainy season has begun in earnest,
perhaps I do not lose much—at any rate, I shall leave my Hong-kong
friends with the utmost regret; their kindness and hospitality have
known no bounds.




                               LETTER II


                                          SHANGHAI, _10th May 1865_.

The _Ganges_ did not leave Hong-kong until the 5th at noon, and we
anchored off the lightship in the estuary here on Monday night, but the
river is so difficult of navigation that we could not run into Shanghai
until the next morning. We had on the whole a fine passage and a very
quick one; C. and R., who were my companions at Canton, came on with
me, and the captain of the ship being a very well-read, gentlemanlike
man, sparing no pains to make every one comfortable, we had a very
cheery voyage. We had besides a young French artillery officer on his
way to revisit the scene of the campaign he had made in 1860, a few
nondescripts, two or three Chinese families, and a Parsee. Of course
the Chinamen pigged together separately, and his “odium theologicum”
forbade the Parsee to eat with us, which was a benefit to all parties,
for he was not a desirable companion by any means. The point of dirt
at which the Chinese passengers contrived to arrive during the voyage,
and the whiffs which came from their cabins when the doors were opened,
surpass belief; one of their great gentlemen here stood over the
French officer and myself as we were playing backgammon one day, and
manifested the utmost interest in the game, uttering exclamations at
every lucky throw, for the Chinese are gamblers to the backbone,—but
so noisome was he that we had to leave off playing and rush on deck
for fresh air. This being the condition of a “gentleman,” fancy how
pleasant the 110 coolie passengers under the forecastle were to sight
and smell. The Chinese ladies did not show at all, but they used to
send their dirty little brats up on deck to play, and very offensive
they contrived to make their small selves. Independently of their
dirt, Chinamen are a sorry spectacle on a journey—their heads require
shaving (a week’s crop looks even worse on the poll than on the chin),
and their tails get untidy and shaggy from being slept upon. Talking
of tails, it seems to be the “chic” at Shanghai to lengthen them
with white instead of black silk, which does not look near so well. I
noticed one man who, like little Cock Robin, had “tied up his tail with
a yard of blue bobbin.” (I found out afterwards that these white and
blue tails are signs of mourning.)

The voyage from Hong-kong to the north, being principally a coasting
affair, is not so dull and uneventful as more sea-going cruises. We
were constantly in sight of land—numberless headlands and islands
mark the course, but render it dangerous in bad weather. There are
plenty of ships to be seen, and all around the rocky islands the sea
is alive with fishing-smacks, their crews busily at work. We had no
mails on board, nor stern officers in charge, so the captain stopped
once and bought a quantity of fresh fish, delicious pomfret all alive
and kicking, paying the fishermen in kind with ship’s biscuit, which I
hope was as great a boon to them as their fish was to us. It is such a
fine sight in one of these narrow island passages, where one can almost
hear the sea dashing against the basaltic rocks on either side, to pass
a great sailing-ship close on our lee, and steam away from her at top
speed. Long before the estuary is reached, the sea, which in these
parts is of a deep aquamarine green, becomes clouded and discoloured.
This is owing to the immense volume of yellow dirty water which the
Yang-tse-kiang pours down. It is much the same colour as the Rhine, and
quite as foul-looking.

We began ascending the river soon after daybreak on Tuesday morning.
Its banks are low and flat. If it were not for a few trees there would
be nothing to relieve the eye from the monotony of the filthy water and
vast plain. Here and there a group of European houses and an ensign
or two mark a settlement. By eleven o’clock we had threaded our way
through the labyrinth of shipping and had reached Shanghai. I landed
at once and heard of an opportunity for Tientsing on Friday next, of
which I shall avail myself. By the way, I must tell you here, that so
far as I can learn, the communications between Tientsing and this place
are somewhat uncertain, so if any mail should not carry a letter to you
from me, do not pay me the compliment of being uneasy, but let no news
be good news.

My good quarters and the kind hospitality which I had met with at
Hong-kong seem to follow me on my travels. Here again I have been
received with the warmest welcome by Mr. D., a junior partner of C.’s,
and I am assured of the same at Tientsing. If all the travellers and
officers stationed in China, whom I have met, did not tell me that this
hospitality is the universal rule, I should be almost shy of accepting
so much kindness.

I have little enough to tell you about Shanghai. The city is ugly and
unattractive, the river dingy, and the country a dead level plain.
From the top of the club-house the view in every direction is utterly
unbroken, there is not a mound the height of dear old Salt Hill. Then,
commercially speaking, the town at the time of my visit was a blank.
The crisis of which I have spoken to you before has told here more
than elsewhere; to my eye the harbour seems full enough of shipping,
but I am told that there are not more than a third of the vessels that
used to be seen in former years. One of the causes which has brought
about this effect has been the speculation in land. When the rebellion
panic was upon the Chinese they were only too glad to flock into the
settlement for shelter; land rose in value, and was bought up in every
direction. Now that the revolt has been put down in this part of the
empire the natives have gone home to their own abodes, and of course
landed property has fallen, so that those speculators who did not sell
in time have their money hopelessly tied up. This, and the competition
system practised by the Europeans in contrast to the Chinese, who do
everything by combination, together with “hard times,” have brought
Shanghai very low. In short, morally as well as physically, it is, for
the present, flat.

I have had a good deal of conversation with Sir Harry Parkes, our
consul here. You will recollect him as famous for the pluck he showed
when he and Loch were taken prisoners in Peking; he is one of the great
authorities in China, and one of our ablest officers in the East. He
tells me that he considers the state of feeling between the Chinese and
Europeans in this part as on the whole satisfactory; that the natives
have begun to accept us and our trade as a necessity; to use his own
expression, it is a sort of husband and wife arrangement, with slight
incompatibilities of temper on both sides. Sir Harry Parkes is a man of
extraordinary determination and energy; his knowledge of the Chinese
language, customs, and character have given him an immense influence
over the natives. He is in every way a remarkable man, and great things
are expected of him, even by those who differ from him in opinion. It
is only fair to say, that there are many men of judgment and experience
out here who do not agree with him in holding that our trade with China
stands on a solid footing. They consider that the unwilling spirit with
which the natives first received us has by no means died out, and that
little by little, always by fair means and without violence,[4] for
they know our strength, the Chinese will endeavour to oust us from our
position, and return to their traditional conservatism. Perhaps this is
a pessimist creed, but still it is largely professed. At any rate the
Chinese will find it a hard matter to get rid of us, for no Government
will give up a matter of nearly six millions of revenue without a
struggle. For the present the British are welcome here. The Ta̔i Pi̔ngs
have been driven out of this part of China, and the rebellion has
dwindled down to comparative unimportance. The Chinese may be given
credit for so much of gratitude as looks upon past benefits as earnests
of future favours. We can still be useful, so we are still courted. It
remains to be seen whether, when we shall have played our part out, our
friends will try to cast us on one side.

When Sir Rutherford Alcock was in authority here he established a
municipal system which so long as Shanghai was prosperous answered very
well; of course, however, this being Chinese territory, subscription
to the authority of the municipality could not be compulsory, nor were
its enactments binding; but it suited the interests of the public to
accept it, and so it was supported by all the respectable part of the
community. Now the failures have told upon this as upon every other
institution, and unless better times come, it will fall to the ground
for want of funds and strength. It would be a great pity that this
should be the case, for there are many improvements needed here; above
all, gas-lighting. It is really to be hoped that things will take a
better turn soon, for they seem to be quite at their worst.

I must tell you of rather a funny offer of service that I received the
other day. R.’s Chinese boy came into me, and after playing nervously
with his tail for a little while, said, “My massa talkee my too muchee
fooloo; my thinkee more better my walkee Peking side long you.” I felt
half-inclined to engage the man for his simplicity, especially as he is
a good servant, though certainly not over bright.


                                                         _11th May._

I have just been to see my berth on board the _Yuen-tse-Fee_, a private
steamer. She is to stop at Chihfu. I have a cabin to myself, a piece of
good luck which I have enjoyed ever since Galle. In about a week hence
I expect to be at Peking. We sail at three in the morning to-morrow,
so I must go on board this evening. The _Yuen-tse-Fee_ is a very tiny
craft; nothing big can get up the Peiho, so if it blows at all shan’t
we just pitch about!

We are expecting the mail in hourly, but I hope to reach Peking before
it.




                               LETTER III


                                           Ship _Yuen-tse-Fee_,
                                             In the Gulf of Pechili,
                                               _15th May 1865_.

I daresay you will understand that I was rather melancholy at leaving
Shanghai. For the first time on all this long journey I was to set out
alone, and my hosts, although they were only recent acquaintances, had
been so kind to me that I felt as if I were leaving old friends. I took
leave of them at half-past eleven on Thursday night, 11th May, for as
the ship was to sail at three in the morning I had to sleep on board.
The harbour was dark and gloomy, and it was as much as I could do to
steer the six-oared gig by the dim light of the lanterns at the various
masts’ heads. In short, everything looked black and dismal, and I felt
very much like going back to school after the holidays; but it don’t
do to give in, and very soon after I got on board I was sleeping as
sound as the rats in my cabin and bed, and an army of mosquitoes which
had flocked on board, would let me. When I woke next morning we were
hard and fast aground in the estuary; a thick fog had come on in the
night, and the captain, missing his course, had run upon one of the
many treacherous shoals of the great river. The tide took us off again
at about eleven, and we went on without further accident.

I had one fellow-passenger, an officer of the purveyor’s department of
the army, on his road to Peking to seek employment under the Imperial
Government.

We had a strong head wind against us at first and very dirty weather
on Friday night. But in spite of wind and weather the little
_Yuen-tse-Fee_ justified her name, which a Chinaman interpreted for me
as “walkee all the same Fly,” and she kept up a good average of eight
knots and a half.

On Sunday morning we were off the Shantung promontory, a fine broad
headland with a rough, jagged outline. Notwithstanding the haziness
of the atmosphere we had a good view of the coast and of the Rocky
Islands which make this sea so dangerous. Passing Cape Cod, we left
to the westward the spot where the unlucky _Race Horse_ was lost, and
arrived at Chihfu at about five o’clock the same evening.

For a town which really has some little commercial importance, Chihfu
is certainly one of the most wretched dens I ever saw. It consists
of one long narrow street of untidy stone and brick houses, the
peculiarity of which is that they have no apparent front or back, so
that it is a mystery how the inhabitants get into or out of them. Two
or three European houses, the office of the Chinese officer of Customs,
a few godowns more or less empty, and here and there a hovel built
up of mud, seaweed, and bamboo matting, complete the town. Its only
ornaments are the flags of the consul and of the Chinese officer. It
is prettily situated at the foot of a range of low, but picturesquely
tossed-about hills, and the harbour with its fleet of junks and
ships looks very well from the town. The type of the inhabitants is
different from that of the southern Chinese, the Tartar features are
very prominent among them, and it seemed to me that they were stronger
and finer men. I certainly never saw a better boat’s crew than the
six men who rowed me on shore. Whether they would have the pluck to
“stay” against an English crew I cannot say, but their short spurt was
admirable.

In spite of its mean appearance there is sufficient trade carried
on at Chihfu to induce some seventy Europeans to reside there. It
is, moreover, likely to become popular as a sea-bathing resort and
sanatorium.

In former days it was a great port for the junks, and there are still
many of them running there; but the junk trade has been very much
knocked on the head by foreign ships and steamers, which the Chinese
see the advantage of chartering, although they continue to build their
own clumsy and unwieldy craft. The principal exports of Chihfu are peas
and bean cake, and a little manufactured silk; there is besides a small
import trade of shirtings and opium.


                                                         _17th May._

The best part of Monday was occupied in discharging our cargo, and we
did not get up steam until five o’clock. A strong wind had sprung
up from the north-west, and the harbour, which is very much exposed
on that side, gave signs and tokens which led us to expect a very
squally night outside; however, the wind dropped suddenly and gave
place to a thick fog, so we escaped being tossed about, at the expense
of a few alarms of running on to the rocks; which is not at all a
pleasant look-out, for even if our lives would not have been in actual
danger, there was the certainty that if we had struck a rock we should
have lost all our baggage, and passed a very uncomfortable night.
We took up another passenger at Chihfu, an interpreter, bound for
Tientsing—apparently a very popular gentleman, for the captain had to
turn out neck and crop a company of friends who had come to see him
off, and who were inclined to prolong that ceremony, which involves
much sherry and brandy drinking, until long past the hour fixed for our
departure.

On Tuesday morning we took up our pilot for the Peiho River. He
reported having come across a junk wrecked and without masts—all
hands had evidently been lost; and on fishing about the cabin with a
boat-hook in order to get the papers if possible, he found two or three
dead bodies in a fearful state of decomposition. It is supposed that
she must have been wrecked more than a month ago.

We are absolutely suffering from cold here. The thermometer is 55°
in my cabin—a serious contrast after the 90° and 95° I have been
accustomed to. My warmer clothes are in the hold, so I am forced to
wear a greatcoat. We expect to find it warmer at Tientsing.

It was late in the afternoon on Tuesday when we arrived at the entrance
of the River Peiho.

Here are the famous Taku Forts, the scene of the disaster of 1859,
when Sir Frederick Bruce went up to get the treaty ratified, and our
vessels were beaten back with the loss of two gunboats, which were
sunk. The two forts stand on either side of the mouth of the river, and
are occupied—that on the north by the French, and that on the south by
the English. A company of infantry suffices to garrison each. They are
about to be evacuated. A little to the east of the British Fort there
still lies one of our sunken gunboats; the Chinese have recovered and
appropriated her guns. I cannot conceive a more dismal lot than that
of garrisoning Taku. Besides the forts, which in themselves are dreary
enough, there are but a few Chinese mud huts and an hotel, principally
patronised by pilots; and the French are cut off even from these by the
Peiho, than which no more filthy little stream ever defiled a sea. Its
banks at the mouth are vast plains of mud, lying flush with the water,
and so bleak and sad-looking that one almost wonders that the very
wild-fowl should be induced to stop there. Mud forts, mud houses, mud
fields, and muddy river—everything is mud.

Higher up stream, although the banks are very flat and uninteresting,
there is no lack of verdure. The trees are insignificant, but there are
green fields and gardens cultivated with vegetables and fruit-trees.
The neighbourhood of Tientsing is said to be the garden of China, and
in the season a peach only fetches three cash, of which one thousand or
more, according to the exchange, go to make up the dollar.

We soon had an experience of the difficulty of navigating the Peiho,
which is no broader than the Thames at Eton, and as tortuous as Cuckoo
weir. Over and over again we were on the point of running aground, and
when on one occasion we did stick, it was a labour of great difficulty
to get off again. A boat’s crew had to be landed, and a line fastened
to a stout tree on the bank, by which means and by backing with all our
force we floated off, the sailors on shore improving the occasion by
stealing onions and vegetables from the gardens on the bank. Nor was
the shallowness of the water our only impediment, for we did not reach
Tientsing without several brushes and collisions with junks, in one of
which our screw was broken.

I found Tientsing in a great state of excitement. It was the last day
of the races, and to my great joy I found my colleague Saurin staying
at the Russian consulate. Of course we agreed to make the journey
to Peking together, and the Russian consul, by way of making things
pleasant, most kindly volunteered to put me up.

The races really showed some very good sport. Tientsing cannot boast
of such a meeting as those of Hong-kong and Shanghai, where English
thoroughbreds are run, and for which such horses as “Buckstone,” since
dead, and “Sir William” are imported; the horses are but Mongol ponies,
the _bona fide_ hacks of their owners and riders, yet they accomplished
the three-mile race in seven minutes and forty seconds. They are very
plucky, strong little beasts, and run till they drop. The races were
an additional stroke of luck for me, for I was able at the end of the
day to buy a capital pony for fifty dollars. The Chinese crowd showed
the greatest possible interest in all the proceedings, and the course
had to be kept _vi et flagellis_, which latter were not spared by
the native police. Perhaps they feared spoiling the Chinaman, who is
proverbially a child.

                                                         _19th May._

I must own that I was agreeably disappointed in Tientsing. So many
travellers have abused it, and inveighed against its filth and its
beggarly crowd, that I expected to be shocked in one or other of my
senses at every step. It certainly is very dirty, but not much more so
than other Chinese towns, or, for that matter, than many in Europe;
and who that has travelled in the sunny South has not seen rags and
tatters, vermin, foul diseases, and deformities paraded as stimulants
to charity? There is one drawback to Tientsing which is really
insufferable. All the wells are salt, and the inhabitants are obliged
to drink the loathsome water of the river. In order to cleanse it, it
is first placed in large jars that the impurities may settle at the
bottom, and then filtered. But nothing can purge it so as to convince
one that the disgusting matter, which forces itself upon one as one
sails up the stream, has been entirely got rid of.

We went to see some of the curiosity shops. There was a great deal
of porcelain to which the dealers and local connoisseurs assigned
wonderful dates and fine titles, but nothing that would be cared for
in England; and the prices were simply outrageous, for the merchants
will pay any mad sum that is asked by the rascally dealers. There were
some very fine specimens of cloisonné enamel, but if the sums demanded
for the porcelain were high, the enamels were ten times dearer. I saw a
quantity of Chinese picture-books; they were not fit to buy, although
some had great merit for delicacy of drawing. They each represented
a story, generally the “Harlot’s Progress,” from a Chinese point of
view, very coarse, and without Hogarth’s grim retribution at the end.
Of course, where such drawings are openly exposed for sale there is
no great strictness of morals, and Tientsing is famous, or rather
infamous, even in China, for every bestial and degrading vice.

The European settlement of Tientsing is about two miles distant from
the Chinese city. There are some fairly good houses built by the side
of a broad bund or quay, and they command fabulous rents. The same
municipal system which obtains at Shanghai has been established here;
and, on the whole, the community shows signs of prosperity, although
the port has been a disappointment to those who expected that it would
reach an importance such as to crush Shanghai and its other rivals, or,
at all events, to divert a considerable portion of their trade. For the
first year or two after its establishment the business done was very
great, and large fortunes were made; one merchant, for example, is just
retiring with a fortune of £5000 a year, accumulated since 1861. But
the Chinese, cunning in trade, very soon found out that it answered
their purpose better to charter steamers, and have consignments made
to themselves directly, than to buy from the agents of the great
houses; consequently, as the trade is entirely import, the Europeans
are finding less and less to do. The _Yuen-tse-Fee_, although she hails
from Glasgow, and is nominally owned by Messrs. Trautmann and Co., a
German firm, is in reality chiefly, if not entirely, the property of a
dirty little Chinese comprador, whom I saw, and to whom the whole of
her cargo was consigned.




                               LETTER IV


                                            PEKING, _23rd May 1865_.

We left Tientsing early on Friday morning the 19th, by which means we
had the tide in our favour, and were able to get quicker clear of the
hideous sights and smells of the river as it runs through the town. We
each had a boat; Saurin’s was the drawing-room, mine the dining-room,
and his servant occupied the third as kitchen. They were capital roomy
boats, covered in with hoods of bamboo and rattan matting, and with a
sort of dresser in each upon which we spread our beds. Each had a crew
of three men, and in Saurin’s, which was the biggest, there was a boy
besides. They were very cheery, hard-working fellows, and indeed they
had no sinecure, for although the wind was ostensibly in our favour,
still the river winds round such sharp twists and elbows that in every
other reach it was dead against us, and we had to proceed laboriously
by dint of towing and punting. But the harder they worked the better
humoured the crew seemed to be, and the boy especially distinguished
himself by zeal equalling that of an unpaid attaché. The shoals are
innumerable, and we were constantly crossing the river backwards and
forwards, along a course marked out by twigs stuck in the mud. There
is no scenery to enjoy, nothing but interminable fields of millet, and
here and there a little wood. There is not a hillock to be seen, and
we were lucky in being as short a time as possible over what must be
a very dull journey. We reached Tungchou at three o’clock on Sunday
afternoon. Here we found our horses, with an escort which had been sent
down with them to meet us.

Tungchou was very busy. A fleet of junks had come in with grain, and
the quay was alive with crowds of coolies, many of them as naked as
they were born, discharging cargo, sifting corn, and carrying it into
granaries. Our appearance produced some astonishment, for “foreign
devils” are hardly yet quite familiar objects so far north. Tungchou
was the place where the unfortunate English prisoners were taken
in 1860, and where Wade and Crealock, carrying a flag of truce and
demanding to parley with the commander, were fired upon and narrowly
escaped with their lives. It is fortified, as all the northern cities
are, but its walls would only be a security against native warriors.
The roads in this part of the world are miracles of badness, and it
is not difficult to conceive the tortures that the English prisoners
must have suffered when they were conveyed along them in native carts
without springs, and having their hands and heels tied together behind
them with cords tightened by water. Every inch of the road to Peking
is famous from the events of that time. Some way outside Tungchou we
rode over the bridge of Palikao,[5] where the Chinese crossed their
spears with the French bayonets, and held their own for half an hour.
From this bridge the Général de Montauban takes his title. Its kylins
and stone flags still bear traces of shot and shell. Riding through
dust over one’s pony’s hocks, and raising a cloud at every step, is
very dry work, and I was glad when we struck off the main road, and,
coming upon a tea-house in a shady nook, stopped to rest and refresh.
The people received us with the utmost _bonhomie_ and civility, and
brought us delicious tea, without milk or sugar, in bowls, hard-boiled
eggs, and a sort of roll-twist fried instead of baked. We soon had
ten or twelve yellow gentlemen round us, eagerly asking all sorts of
questions about ourselves, our ages, and belongings. Murray talks
Chinese fluently, and Saurin has also some knowledge of it, so we got
on capitally. Our ages always puzzle Chinamen. They neither wear beard
nor moustache until they have reached the age of forty, so they think
that all Europeans who wear such appendages must have passed that age.
A single eye-glass is, however, the possession which commands the most
astonishment. They are familiar with spectacles and double eye-glasses,
for they themselves wear them of portentous size, and mounted in thick
brass or tortoise-shell rims. But a single glass is indeed a marvel,
and provokes much laughter. Though the peculiarities of foreigners
amuse the Chinese as much as theirs do us, it is singular how their
natural courtesy prevents their showing it in the offensive manner
that every Englishman has experienced in some foreign countries. I
had expected to find the country on this side of Peking flat, ugly,
and barren. Flat it certainly is, but there are plenty of trees and
rich fields, and it cannot be called ugly. The villages and graves
argue an immense population. It is not till one is under the very
walls of the town that one sees Peking. The walls are high, ruinous,
battlemented, and picturesque, of a fine deep gray colour. They are
capped at intervals by towers of fantastic Chinese architecture, and,
with their lofty gates, make a strange and striking picture. As a means
of defence against modern artillery the walls of Peking are probably
absurd. However, before I tell you anything about Peking I had better
know something myself. At present I only know that I was very hot, very
tired, and as dusty as the oldest press in the Record office, when I
rode into the court of Her Majesty’s Legation, where I received the
warmest welcome from Wade, the _chargé d’affaires_.

We have received bad Chinese news. Sangkolinsin, the Mongol chief
who commanded at the Peiho in 1859, and was temporarily disgraced for
not being able to beat off the allies in 1860, has been killed by
the rebels in the province of Shantung, some 400 miles hence. He was
reputed a brave soldier and an honest man. Although the Chinese affect
to disregard the importance of the intelligence, there is no doubt that
it is very serious. The fire is burning everywhere, and they cannot or
will not take the proper means to put it out.

  _Note._—I should wish to add here one word of admiration and respect
  for the memory of Sir Thomas Wade, my first chief in China. He had
  been Lord Clyde’s adjutant, but gave up the army for diplomacy. A
  great student and master of many languages, his Chinese scholarship
  won the admiration even of the learned mandarins with whom he had
  to deal. During the two Chinese Wars he distinguished himself, not
  only by his great abilities as a negotiator, but also by the most
  dauntless courage. Generous and self-sacrificing to a fault, he was
  one of the greatest gentlemen I ever met.—1900.




                                LETTER V


                                            PEKING, _1st June 1865_.

When Wade was in England last year Lord Stanley said to him: “Peking’s
a gigantic failure, isn’t it? not a two-storied house in the whole
place, eh?” To Lord Stanley’s practical eye, no doubt, it might be a
failure, but an artist would find much to admire and put on paper.

Pe-king, which means the northern capital, as Nan-king means the
southern, consists of two cities, the Chinese and the Tartar, and
within this latter, again, is the Imperial city, which contains the
palace and precincts of the court. Both cities are surrounded by walls
of dark-gray brick; those of the Tartar city are fifty feet high, forty
feet wide at the top, and about sixty feet below; the walls of the
Chinese city are less important, being only thirty feet high. These
walls have battlements and loop-holes for guns. That of the Chinese
city has fallen into decay, but that of the Tartar is more carefully
repaired. At intervals are lofty watch-towers standing out against
the sky. High towers stand also above the gates, which are closed at
sunset, after which time ingress and egress are forbidden.

The streets are broad roads, in most cases unpaved, and in all uncared
for. They are flanked on each side by shops and low houses, but their
breadth is lessened by the countless stalls and stands of hucksters of
all sorts that take them up often in quadruple rows. In this region of
dust and dirt the streets are equally filthy summer and winter. Both in
the Chinese and Tartar cities there are large open spaces and buildings
standing in their own grounds, covering areas of many acres. In the
former city these are the temples of the Buddhist and Taoist religions,
in the latter they are the palaces of the Emperor and persons of
distinction. These grounds, planted as they are with lofty trees, give
a great beauty to the town, and often in the heart of either city
there are spots which are pictures of village life. Standing among
these groves of trees the brilliant colours and fantastic designs
of the Chinese architecture have a wonderfully pleasing effect. The
wall of the imperial palace, covered with highly glazed yellow tiles,
with towers at the corners shining like gold in the sun, is especially
striking. Whichever way one turns there is something grotesque and
barbarous to be seen, and the signs of decay and rot do not detract
from the picture. In fact Peking is like a vast curiosity shop, with
all the dust and dirt which are among the conditions of bric-à-brac. It
would be pleasant-looking and admiring were it not for the difficulties
of riding through the city owing to the enormous crowds which block
the way—carts, porters, camels, chairs, pedlars, beggars, lamas,
muleteers, horse-copers from Mongolia, archers on horseback, mandarins
with their suites, small-footed women, great ladies in carts, closely
veiled to keep off the gaze of the profane vulgar. In short, every
variety of yellow and brown humanity, not to speak of dogs and pigs,
get into one’s path at every moment, and raise clouds of dust, which
fill eyes, ears, hair, mouth, and nose, and temporarily destroy every
sense save that of touch. It is as if the dust of all the Derby days
since the institution of that race (by the bye I wonder what horse
has won it this year) had been borne by the winds to find a permanent
home here. A dust-storm in the north of China is a natural phenomenon.
Clouds draw over the sky as if a thunderstorm was going to burst. In
my inexperience the first time I saw this I expected rain to fall, but
instead of rain there came a fine dust penetrating everything and not
to be shut out by door or window. This nuisance, which comes to us from
the great Mongolian deserts, besides hurting the eyes as common dust
by filling them with extraneous matter, has chemical properties which
produce a smarting and burning pain. Dust-storms are sometimes so thick
that men lose their way as in a London fog. It is indeed “a darkness
that may be felt.”

The distance round the walls of Peking is something like twenty-three
miles, of which fifteen must be given to the Tartar city, which is
square in shape and lies to the north of the oblong Chinese city.
Tradition, and the mystery which for so many years hung over the
capital, have assigned to it an exaggerated population. The Chinese
affected to believe it contained two million souls, and that no
capital in the world could compete with it. This may have been the case
in the time of the Emperor Chien-Lung, who reigned from 1736 to 1795
a.d. But nowadays, judging from the enormous empty spaces, and from
the gardens and courtyards, which no gentleman’s residence is without,
and even allowing for the dense crowding of some quarters, it probably
does not reach a million. It is impossible to form any precise estimate
of the numbers of the “Doors and Mouths.” Doctors disagree, and I
have heard the people of Peking reckoned at various figures, from six
hundred thousand to a million and a half. Until Peking was opened to
Europeans the southern Chinese used to stick at no lie about it. For
instance, if they were told of some great scientific invention such as
railways, the electric telegraph, or the like, they would say at once
with the utmost coolness, “Have seen! Have seen! Have got plenty Peking
side!” And in like manner they lied about its size and population.
The country round about Peking seems to be very thickly peopled. I
was prepared to find it so, but nevertheless I had hardly expected
to see so many human beings and their traces, which are often very
unpleasant, especially in China.

Our Legation is situated in the southern part of the Tartar city.
We occupy a most picturesque palace called the Liang Kung Fu, or
Palace of the Duke of Liang, which, like all Chinese buildings of
importance, covers an immense space of ground. There are courtyards
upon courtyards, huge empty buildings with red pillars, used as covered
courts, state approaches guarded by two great marble lions, and a
number of houses with only a ground floor, each of us inhabiting one
to himself. When the Legation first came to live here the whole place
was put into repair, and redecorated in the Chinese fashion with fluted
roofs of many colours, carved woodwork, kylins of stone and pottery,
and all the thousand and one fancies with which the Chinese cover their
buildings. Unfortunately the repairs were badly executed, and nothing
further has been done to keep matters straight, so the Legation, which
ought to be as pretty as possible, is really a disgrace to us. The
gardens are a wilderness, the paving of the courts is broken, the
walls are tumbling down, and the beautiful place is going to rack
and ruin. In this climate of extreme heat and cold a stitch in time
saves ninety-nine.[6] Fancy a residence in the heart of a great and
populous city where foxes, scorpions, polecats, weasels, magpies, and
other creatures that one expects to find in the wild country, abound.
That will give you an idea of how space is wasted in Peking. The great
drawback to our palace is its situation. We have more than an hour’s
ride before we can escape from the city and its stinks, to breathe a
breath of fresh air. It requires an immense exercise of energy to face
an hour’s ride through the streets of Peking in order to get a canter
in the open; and I am often half tempted to sell my pony and dismiss
my groom, but this would be tantamount to shutting myself up for good
in the Legation, for walking at Peking is even more disagreeable than
riding.

His Imperial Highness the Prince of Kung, President of the Council,
Chief of the Board of Foreign Affairs, Prime Minister, and what not
besides, sent his card yesterday to announce to Wade that he would pay
him an official visit. I enclose you his visiting card.

The Prince of Kung is the brother of the late Emperor, and in 1860 was
entrusted by him with the negotiations with Lord Elgin and Baron Gros.
During the minority of the present Emperor, who is about twelve years
old, the two Empresses-dowager[7] are nominally regents; but the Prince
has the care of the Emperor’s education, and is virtually the regent of
the empire. He was very nearly meeting with the fate of Humpty-Dumpty
a little while back, for he was accused of selling places, abuse of
patronage, and insolence in the Presence. His accuser was supposed to
have been instigated by one of the Empresses who is hostile to him,
and to have been made cat’s-paw of by a court intrigue. However that
may be, the Empresses issued an edict in the style of the chorus in
the _Agamemnon_ which shows how prosperity leads to insolence, and
insolence to retribution, and the Prince was deprived of all his
offices and glories. For a few days he remained in disgrace, but his
brothers came to the rescue, a Grand Council was held, and the Prince
was reinstated in the office of Foreign Affairs in consideration of
his great services. This, however, did not look well for the Prince,
as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs carries with it such unpopularity
that its possession alone might be esteemed a doubtful pleasure; and it
was not until his former honours were one by one restored to him that
he could be said to be reinstated in court favour. The charges against
him were declared unfounded, and it was agreed that the question of
insolence was a family matter, and should not interfere with public
affairs. Meanwhile his accuser goes about at large, but about as free
as a mouse that a cat lets slip out of her claws for a second or two. I
would not be in his skin for something.

A little before the hour fixed for the Prince’s visit, Hêng-Chi and
Tung, two of the Board of Foreign Affairs, arrived to meet him.
Hêng-Chi is the man whose name became known in Europe during the war in
1860, and during Parke’s and Loch’s captivity. He is a little thin old
man very like Mr. Meadows, the actor at the Princesses’ Theatre, and a
great dandy. He wore a pearl gray silk dress turned up with blue. His
fan-case, chopstick-case, and other knick-knacks which he wears at
his girdle, are richly embroidered, and mounted with seed pearls and a
peculiar clouded pink coral which the Chinese call baby-face coral. His
snuff-bottle is of the finest Fei Tsui, or emerald green jade, which is
worth its weight in diamonds here, but of all his possessions none is
in his eyes more charming than a large silver Geneva turnip watch which
he displays with much pride. In his boot, which is of black satin, he
carries his pipe with its tiny silver bowl, and a gorgeous Fei Tsui
mouthpiece, together with sweetmeats, pills, and other trifles. His
white cap with the red tassel of office hanging all round it, has a
pink coral button (Hêng-Chi is a mandarin of the first button), and the
peacock’s feather which falls from it is mounted in more Fei Tsui. To
crown all, he wears a pair of spectacles as big as saucers, with broad
silver rims. Never was a little old man so pleased with himself; his
little airs and graces and _petit-maître_ ways are very funny. Tung is
a jolly, fat, old mandarin and a great contrast to Hêng-Chi. He is a
great man of letters, and has translated Longfellow’s “Psalm of Life”
into Chinese verse. That is, Wade gave him a literal version of the
English, and he made a poem of it, which is said to have great merit.

In due course of time the Prince arrived in his chair attended by a
number of running footmen, and an escort mounted on ponies. Wade and
I received him, and I was presented to him as Mi-ta-jên, the official
name by which my arrival was announced to the Chinese Foreign Office—we
are all obliged to have monosyllabic names for our intercourse with the
Chinese. Sir F. Bruce was Pu-ta-jên (the Chinese cannot pronounce an
R, so they rendered his name as Pu-lu-su), Wade is Wei-ta-jên. Ta-jên,
literally “great man,” is a title denoting official rank, and is that
which is borne by the mandarins.

The Prince is a young man about 28 years of age, judging by
appearances. He is pockmarked, as indeed is almost every Chinaman
I have seen. He is very shortsighted, and has the same trick of
screwing up his eyes that I have, and I could not help thinking what
a caricature we should have made as we sat opposite each other making
faces. As soon as the Prince had taken his seat he drew his pipe out of
his boot, and one of his own attendants brought him fire, serving him
kneeling on one knee. Tea was brought as a matter of course, and then
the conversation began. The great man had a short, flippant manner,
and this it was that so nearly brought him to grief. He was immensely
amused by an English bell-pull, and a mother-of-pearl paper-knife which
lay on the table. My single eyeglass was a real boon to the Prince.
Whenever he was getting the worst of an argument, and was at a loss
for an answer, he would stop short, throw up his hands in amazement,
and pointing at me cry out, “A single eyeglass! marvellous!” By thus
creating a diversion at my expense he gave himself time to consider
his reply. He seemed very friendly with Wade, and full of jokes and
fun—of course I could not understand a word of what was said, but I
took refuge behind a big cigar, and looked on vastly amused by our
guest’s ways. I thought I detected a cruel, cunning look behind all his
affectation of good-humour.

When the Prince had gone, Hêng-Chi, who, besides being part-Minister
for Foreign Affairs, is also a general officer, and many other things,
for pluralism is the order of the day, invited us to a review and
breakfast afterwards on the 3rd of June, at six in the morning.

It may be a calumny, but I strongly suspect Hêng-Chi of dyeing his tail.

  _Note._—The senior Empress-dowager, who had been the first wife
  of the Emperor Hsien Fêng, appears to have been more or less a
  cypher. The real power was wielded by the Empress-mother Tsu Hsi.
  This remarkable lady was according to some accounts a slave girl,
  according to others the daughter of a member of the imperial family.
  Nor are the two statements incompatible in a country where adoption
  of children holds good. The Emperor wishing to raise a girl in his
  harem to the highest position would only need to command one of his
  relations to adopt her, and she would at once be an imperial princess
  as much as if she had been born in the purple, or rather in the
  yellow.

  The senior Empress-dowager, or Eastern Empress as she was called,
  died on 18th April 1881, and the power was then absolutely and solely
  in the hands of the Empress-mother. The latter’s son, the Emperor
  Tung Chi, had died without issue in 1875, and his cousin, a child of
  four, was raised to the Lung Wei or Dragon’s throne in his stead. The
  regency remained as before with the two Dowager-empresses.

  Dr. Wells Williams, in his _Middle Kingdom_, a perfect encyclopædia
  on all Chinese matters, says, “The Empress-dowager is the most
  important subject within the palace, and His Majesty does homage
  at frequent intervals, by making the highest ceremony of nine
  prostrations before her. When the widow of Kia King reached the age
  of sixty in 1836 many honours were conferred by the Emperor. An
  extract from the ordinance issued on this festival will exhibit the
  regard paid her by the Sovereign:—

  “Our extensive dominions have enjoyed the utmost prosperity under
  the shelter of a glorious and enduring state of felicity—our
  exalted race has become most illustrious under the protection of
  that honoured relative to whom the whole court looks up. To her
  happiness, already unalloyed, the highest degree of felicity has
  been super-added, causing joy and gladness to every inmate of the
  Six Palaces. The grand ceremonies of the occasion shall exceed in
  splendour the utmost requirements of the ancients in regard to the
  human relations, calling forth the gratulation of the whole Empire.
  It is indispensable that the observances of the occasion should be
  of an exceedingly unusual nature, in order that our reverence for
  our august parent and care of her may both be equally and gloriously
  displayed.... In the first month of the present winter occurs the
  sixtieth anniversary of Her Majesty’s sacred natal day. At the
  opening of the happy period the sun and the moon shed their united
  genial influences on it. When commencing anew the revolution of the
  sexagenary cycle the honour thereof adds increase to her felicity.
  Looking upward and beholding her glory, we repeat our gratulations,
  and announce the event to heaven, to earth, to our ancestors, and
  to the patron-gods of the empire. On the nineteenth day of the
  tenth moon, in the fifteenth year of Tao Kwang, we will conduct
  the princes, the nobles, and all the high officers, both civil
  and military, into the presence of the great Empress, benign and
  dignified, universally placid, thoroughly virtuous, tranquil, and
  self-collected, in favours unbounded; and we will then present our
  congratulations on the glad occasion, the anniversary of her natal
  day. The occasion yields a happiness equal to what is enjoyed by
  goddesses in heaven, and while announcing it to the gods and to our
  people, we will tender to her blessings unbounded.”—_Middle Kingdom_,
  vol. i. p. 410.

  Rations to soldiers, honours, promotions, pardons, etc., were
  ordered in honour of the day—“Every perfectly filial son or obedient
  grandson, every upright husband or chaste wife, upon proofs being
  brought forward, shall have a monument erected with an inscription
  in his or her honour.” Soldiers who had reached the age of ninety
  or one hundred received money to erect an honorary portal, and
  tombs, temples, and bridges were ordered to be repaired; but, as Dr.
  Williams slily remarks, “how many of these exceedingly great and
  special favours were actually carried into effect cannot be stated.”

  This edict of the Emperor Tao Kwang is of high interest at this
  moment (1900), as illustrating the position of the present
  Dowager-empress Tsu Hsi, which has seemed so incomprehensible to us
  Westerns. An ambitious woman, with the master mind of an Elizabeth or
  a Catherine, would, it is easy to perceive, find opportunities which
  she has certainly turned to the best, or worst, advantage.


                                                         _4th June._

I wished my friend General Hêng-Chi with all his soldiers a long way
off when my boy came to pull me out of bed at daybreak yesterday
morning. We had had a great storm the night before, so the dust was
laid, but _en revanche_ the streets were a sea of mud, and many of
them regular rivers, and we had to flounder on, our horses putting
their feet in holes at every step. It took us nearly an hour and a
half of this work to get to the parade ground on the Anting plain.
The ground was kept by means of sticks and red string, with a soldier
at each stick. We were shown straight to a small blue tent, where the
general received us with much ceremony. When we had drunk tea the three
generals, the Russian Embassy, and ourselves left the tent and took
up our place on a small mound. Our appearance was the signal for the
military music to strike up. The band was composed of about twelve
Chinamen, and their instruments were large sea shells or conches, out
of which they produced the most dismal and distressing and continuous
howl that it ever was my bad luck to listen to. I hardly know what to
compare it to. You have heard the noise in a shell—it was like that,
but magnified a million times. As soon as we had taken our position,
a soldier in front of us waved a huge flag, and the business of the
day began. There were about two thousand soldiers, and they were to
exercise, not with the swords, and bows, and shields of “the Braves,”
but according to our drill book, which Wade has translated for them,
and with rifles and guns given them by the Russians. They went through
their evolutions respectably, so said Wade, who is an old soldier and a
first-rate drill; but I own that when they advanced close up to us and
delivered a volley bang in our faces, I felt that it was not unlikely
that, as at our Volunteer reviews, a stray ramrod might have been left
in a rifle. However, no accident occurred, barring the bursting of the
powder box of one of the big guns, by which four men were severely
scorched and five put _hors de combat_, for the lieutenant in charge
of the gun was then and there collared and summarily bambooed, _coram
populo_, for carelessness in giving the word to fire before the powder
box was closed. Such is discipline!

The sun was beginning to be very powerful, so it was a great relief
when the review was declared to be over, and it was announced that each
of the men was to receive three halfpence for his good conduct that day
in the field. Upon the hearing of this joyful intelligence, the army to
a man went down on one knee, in token of gratitude, though they knew
perfectly well that they never would see the money. Poor devils!

Breakfast was served in a temple hard by. When we sat down Hêng-Chi was
not to be found. It turned out that, with a thoughtfulness which would
have done credit to many a more civilised host, he had gone to see that
the men of our and the Russian escorts were well cared for.

A Chinese meal exactly reverses the order of the things which is
practised in Europe. First came cups of tea, and when these were all
cleared away two tiny saucers were placed before each person. Then the
dessert and sweets were put upon the table; oranges, apples, candied
walnuts, sweets of all kinds, hemp seed done up with flour and sugar,
apricot kernels preserved in oil and dried, and other delicacies. Next
came the savoury meats—of these the most remarkable were sea-slugs,
like turtle-soup in taste, bamboo sprouts, sharks’ fins, and deers’
sinews—all gelatinous dishes are the most highly prized; the famous
bird’s-nest soup is just like isinglass not quite boiled down. Finally
came a sort of soup of rice. I found it very difficult at first to
eat with chopsticks. The manner of eating is to dip your chopsticks
into any one of the bowls, and transfer a morsel to your own saucers,
which are not changed, neither are the chopsticks wiped, during the
whole proceeding. If you wish to pay a person a compliment, you select
a tit-bit with your own chopsticks and put it on your neighbour’s
plate, and he does the same in return. This gives the entertainment
the appearance of an indecorous scramble, for one is continually
leaning across two or three people to repay some civility. The dishes
are very rich, and I should think unwholesome in the extreme. There
were upwards of sixty different eatables put upon the table, and I
must own that although my chopsticks went into nearly every little
bowl, there was not one which did not please my taste. Native wine was
served to us in little cups of the size of our liqueur glasses; it
had rather a pleasant taste, and was very dry. As soon as breakfast
was over the Chinese gentlemen produced out of their boots—which seem
an inexhaustible receptacle for everything, from tobacco to state
papers—small pieces of paper, with which they wiped their mouths and
ivory chopsticks, and then came a piece of Chinese politeness which
is very offensive to Europeans; for it is good manners here, out of
compliment to the host, and in token of having eaten well and been
satisfied, to produce the longest and loudest eructations, and Hêng-Chi
and the two generals left nothing to be desired in that respect, making
a great display of good breeding. Tea and conversation in the court of
the temple brought my first Chinese entertainment to a close. I can’t
tell you how strange it seemed to me to begin with dessert and end
with soup!




                               LETTER VI


                                           PEKING, _23rd June 1865_.

Since I wrote to you last I have neither seen nor done anything worth
recording. The thermometer has been standing at from 95° to 107° in our
courtyard, so there is not much temptation to go sight-seeing, or even
to move outside the Legation; inside, the days are as like as twins.
However, there is a bag going to-day, so I must try and patch up a
letter.

We are thinking of making a move to the hills next Monday; we have
almost decided on a temple called Pi Yün Ssŭ, about 12½ miles from
this. I shall be very glad to go, for the town is becoming abominably
stuffy and hot, and the dust is something beyond belief. We shall
probably stay six weeks or two months, coming into Peking on mail days.
We are forced to take our whole establishment with us, so it is not
worth while going for a shorter time.

By the bye my establishment has been increased by a teacher; not as
in Europe, a master who is paid so much to come for an hour a day,
but a man who regularly enters my service, and is at my beck and
call whenever I want him. I have taken a header into Chinese, and am
floundering about in a sea of difficulties. One great disadvantage that
one labours under is that the native teachers, and there are no others,
of course don’t speak a word of any language but their own. At first,
therefore, Ku, that’s my man’s name, and I used to sit and look at one
another in a hopeless state of unintelligibility, until either he got
bored, made signs of having a stomach-ache, and took his leave, or I
could stand him no longer and dismissed him. However, it is surprising
how quick a man may pick up, not the language of a strange country, but
a jargon that will pass current, if he is dependent upon it for the
everyday necessaries of life. Teachers, servants, cooks, and grooms,
all must receive their orders in Chinese; shopping and bargain-driving
increase one’s stock of words; so one way or another Ku and I get on
pretty tolerably. He will accompany me to the hills, and as I mean
to get through much work there, I hope that by the time you get this
letter I shall be well started up the stream.

A pleasanter addition to my personnel, and a sweeter, for he does not
eat garlic nor smoke opium, is a small Manilla poodle, Nou-nou by name,
whom I have inherited. He has consoled the exile of a succession of
diplomatists at Peking, and has finally fallen into my hands. He is
the jolliest little dog, and has the most companionable ways. Although
only a shade bigger than your Tiny, he is as plucky as Tom Sayers, and
is the terror of strange dogs and Chinamen; indeed his valour being
much too great for his body often brings him to trouble. For many years
he would fly at any dog that he saw in any part of the Legation, and
bid him get out of his majesty’s way; but now he is no longer in his
_première jeunesse_, having received much hard usage from dogs over
whom as puppies he had been used to exercise a terror, especially from
one big black retriever, who won’t stand any nonsense. Nou-nou has
taken possession of our courtyard, where by tacit consent the other
dogs seem to respect his authority. If one of them so much as shows his
nose there, Nou-nou pricks his ears, his tail curls as crisply as of
old, and he flies at the intruder, who quickly disappears. Here Nou-nou
leads a happy life; every one has a kind word for him, and his only
grievance is, that on Mondays and Thursdays he is carried off by a big
Chinaman, from his holy looks like a pre-Raphaelite picture, known as
“the apostle,” and summarily washed.

We have better news from Shantung. The Imperialist troops have driven
back the rebels. There is now no danger of this province being invaded,
which might have been a serious thing for us, and certainly would have
resulted in the sacking of Tientsing. It is really provoking, after all
the pains that have been taken to induce this wretched Government to
save itself, which it could easily do by the most ordinary exertion,
to see half a dozen archers outside the gates making such practice
at a target twenty yards off as any girl of eighteen, member of a
toxophilite club at home, would be ashamed of. Yet this is the stuff
which the Chinese Government are content to accept as the means of
putting down the insurrection. The troops that they are drilling in
the European fashion are merely a sop to foreign representatives,
and not the evidence of earnest wishes to improve. Self-help and
self-improvement seem repugnant to the nature of this belly-patting
Buddhist nation. They are willing enough to get foreign officers,
especially Englishmen, in whom the example of Colonel Gordon has
given them unbounded confidence, to drill and lead their troops; but
they will do nothing for themselves; and there is a class of superior
officers (such as Li, the governor of the province in which Shanghai
is situated) who, having acquired a certain reputation for valour and
military ability among their own people, consider it beneath their
dignity to serve under foreign officers. The obstacles which such men
throw in the way of the latter, together with the uncertainty of being
able to obtain supplies and pay for the troops under their command,
render their position intolerable, as Colonel Gordon found on more
than one occasion. The English officers who have been lent to instruct
the Imperialists have found their way in many instances anything but
smooth, and have had great difficulty in carrying out the measures
which they deemed necessary. Under these circumstances, it is not to
be wondered at that the rebels, whose ranks are swelled by the local
banditti, secret societies, and Imperialist soldiers mutinous for want
of pay, should still show a head.

With this internal difficulty pressing them sorely, the Chinese
continue persistently to break their treaty engagements with the Great
Powers, any of which, if it were so minded, has a handle for blowing up
the whole concern. Wên-Hsiang, who is the chief of the Board of Foreign
Affairs [which he virtually directs, although the Prince of Kung is
nominally at its head], and who is the most advanced and patriotic man
in the Government, is fully conscious of the danger of the situation;
but unfortunately he is a timid man, and it is one thing to convince
a Chinaman, and another to induce him to act upon his conviction. So
the treaties continue to be broken, and the existence of the present
dynasty in China hangs upon the patience of foreign governments, who
have too great a stake in the country to sink the ship so long as there
is a hope of her floating.

It is only fair to say, on the other hand, that the residence of
foreign representatives at Peking during the last four years has
certainly been productive of some good. As an evidence of this, Dr.
Martin, an American missionary, has produced, at the expense of the
Board of Foreign Affairs and with the co-operation of a commission
specially appointed by the Prince of Kung, a translation into the
Chinese language of Wheaton’s _International Law_. To this Tung-ta-jên,
whom I mentioned in my last letter to you as the translator of
Longfellow’s “Psalm of Life,” has added a preface. This preface, coming
as it does from the vice-president of the College of Historians, one of
the chiefs of the lettered class in China, adds great authority to the
work, the publication of which is certainly an event of importance in
the history of the country.




                               LETTER VII


                                        PI YÜN SSŬ, _7th July 1865_.

You will see by the date of this that we have beaten a retreat from
the dust, heat, and filth of the city, and that our “villegiatura” has
begun. Indeed, Peking was becoming insupportable. The thermometer when
we left was standing at 108° in the shade, the highest degree which it
has reached for these three years, and I was heartily glad to turn my
back upon the Legation gates.

The plain between these hills and the town is very beautiful. It is
thickly studded with farmsteads, knolls of trees, and tombs, which are
always the prettiest spots in China, for as a balance against the dirt
and squalor in which they pass their lives, the Chinese choose the most
romantic and delightful places for their final habitations. The soil is
wonderfully fertile, and yields two crops in the year, so that usually
the plain bears every appearance of prosperity; but this year, owing
to the excessive heat and drought, the first crop has failed, and the
fields are parched and burnt up. In vain the Emperor prays for rain;
it only comes in rare and scanty showers, and the fierce sun bakes
the ground harder than ever. The country folk are in great distress,
and food is at famine prices. Yet they seem happy and contented, and
when we asked one of the priests here whether there was no danger of a
famine riot, he answered, “Oh, no! the people about here are too great
fools to get up a disturbance.” Those that are hardest up will sell
their daughters into bondage, and there will be an end of the matter.

The hills west of Peking are the Switzerland of Northern China. They
are not very high nor extraordinarily beautiful, but there are some
very pretty gorges and valleys, richly wooded, and at any rate the air
is fresh and pure. Every gorge has a perfect nest of temples, built
by the pious emperors of the Ming dynasty and the earlier Tartars,
for which good deeds the _Corps diplomatique_ at Peking cannot be
too grateful. Properly speaking, according to the rules of their
order, the Buddhist monks are forbidden to receive any money for the
hospitality which they offer to strangers, so when the Chinese go to
stay at a temple they restore or beautify some part of it as a return;
but we prefer paying a few dollars, and in spite of their statutes the
arrangement seems to suit the monks as well as it does us.

Our temple is called “Pi Yün Ssŭ,” “the temple of the azure clouds,”
a romantic name, and certainly the place is worthy of it. It is
built on terraces ascending the hill to a length of about half a
mile, and on every terrace is a shrine, each more beautiful (if
that is the proper word to apply to the grotesque buildings of this
country) than the last; black and white marble statues and vases,
bronze dragons, alto-relievos and basso-relievos representing kings
and warriors, gods and goddesses, and fabulous monsters, all of rare
workmanship,—inscriptions graven on marble and stone, and bronze or
gilt upon wood, meet one at every step; and the whole is set in a nest
of rock-work, fountains, woods, and gardens. At the top is a small
temple more in the Indian than the Chinese style, and here there is
a very curious idol with ten heads, three large ones at the bottom,
from which three smaller ones spring, in their turn carrying three
lesser ones surmounted by a single very small head. The hands are in
proportion. This little place commands a panoramic view over the plain,
with the walls and towers of Peking in the distance.

Our habitation consists of several little houses on one side of
the temple; we dine in an open pavilion, surrounded by a pond and
artificial rockery, with ferns and mosses in profusion; high trees
shade it from the sun, and close by us a cold fountain pours out of the
rock into the pond, in which we can ice our wine to perfection. The
pond was dried up, and the fountain had been turned from its channel,
when we arrived; but we got together a few coolies, and soon set that
right. Fancy our feelings on coming here, when we were told that if
there came no rain we could have no bath! This too in a climate where
the hot nights make a morning wash doubly necessary. The priest had
hardly said the word, when a tremendous thunderstorm broke over the
mountain and set our minds at rest, and next morning we discovered that
we could have the most delicious natural bath. Our life here is very
simple and very, very dull. We are only two—Saurin and myself. We rise
at any hour after daybreak, breakfast at eight, dine at three; after
dinner we go for a ride, or a scramble over the mountain, and come home
to tea at about eight or nine. We sit smoking our cheroots for perhaps
an hour, talking always about home and watching the fire-flies, that,
according to Chinese tradition, served as lamps to Confucius and his
disciples. A visit from or to the Russian Legation, who have got a
temple at about an hour and a half’s ride from here, is the only break
to the monotony of our daily life. I have my teacher with me here, and
work with him at the language from breakfast to dinner; that is my
serious occupation, and about as hard a task as one could wish for. I
carry about my lessons for the rest of the day written on paper fans—a
capital dodge for keeping one’s work before one. We are rather bothered
by mosquitoes, and a most venomous little insect called the sand-fly,
yellow in colour, and smaller than a midge, which is lucky, for if he
were of the size of a blue-bottle I should think his bite would be
fatal. There are quantities of scorpions too; one of our men was stung
the other day. We heard a great wailing and crying one night, for all
the world like an Irish wake; next morning our servants told us that
the cook’s assistant had been stung in the hand, and that he had died
in an hour, but that he had come to rights again, and was getting well.
This sounded something like being “kilt entirely.” The man’s presence
at the temple illustrates a custom of the country; of course, as is the
way of the East, no one can move without a large retinue. There must be
a valet for each man, and a groom for each horse, and a man or two to
do nothing, and two or three more to look on and see them do it. But
besides this, like Thackeray’s description of Irishmen and their poor
relations, no Chinaman is so poor or mean but what he can find a poorer
and a meaner to do part of his work. A coolie earning three dollars a
month will pay another one dollar a month to help him, and he in his
turn will give a boy a few cash, that he may enjoy his ease and his
opium. The man who was stung was the cook’s poor relation. Although his
brother and the other men supposed him to be dying, and finally to
have actually died, they never came and told us, nor did they get any
assistance for him. We heard the noise, but one of our servants has a
very pretty little talent for tickling a lute, and there was so little
difference between the sounds of the wake and those of the concerts he
gets up, that we thought the hullabaloo was only a melancholy variety
of the latter, so we took no notice of it. As far as Chinese remedies
are concerned, better be without them. It is almost impossible to
believe the amount of ignorance which exists in China about medicine
and surgery. Native doctors, who never dissect, are utterly ignorant
for the most part of the position of the heart, the lungs, and the
other principal organs. They are ignorant of the difference between
arteries and veins, nor do they understand the circulation, looking
upon the several pulses of the body as the effects of separate causes.
All diseases are attributed by them to their favourite doctrine, “hot
and cold influences.” They have a certain knowledge of the use of
drugs, and of mercury in particular, but their remedy above all others
is acupuncture. Some days ago my groom had an attack of diarrhœa, and
his medical man pricked him underneath the tongue for it! Sir John
Davis tells a story of a doctor who wanted to prick a man for hernia.
If in these prickings they cut into an artery, and the man dies, why,
so much the worse for him! it is fate. Astrology plays a great part in
their medical art, certain planets being supposed to influence certain
parts of the body. It is one among many instances in which one sees
the analogy between the present condition of China and Europe in the
Middle Ages.




                              LETTER VIII


                                            PEKING, _8th July 1865_.

We have ridden in to spend three days, copying despatches and sighing
for our “cool grot.” The town seemed too beastly as we came in. Peking,
as Southey said of Exeter, “is ancient and stinks.” The “Beggar’s
Bridge,” which we have to pass every time we go into the Chinese city,
and nearly every time we go out, is the most loathsome and stinking
exhibition that it ever was my fate to come across. Here every day a
hundred or two of the most degraded specimens of humanity congregate
and beg. By far the greater majority of them are clothed only in dirt,
and all sorts of repulsive cutaneous complaints; some have a linen rag,
but it is worn over the shoulders, and in no way serves as a decent
covering. Lice, mange, scrofula, leprosy, and filth are allowed to
remain undisturbed by water or drugs. They are a stock-in-trade, and
as such rather encouraged than not. It is a sickening sight when these
creatures come and perform the ko̔to̔u to us, prostrating themselves in
the dust or mud, which is scarcely as dirty as themselves. I spare you
a description of the food I have seen them eating. If ever I get back
to Europe, I feel that the Beggar’s Bridge will be a nightmare to me
for the rest of my life. All this strikes one with double force after
spending a fortnight in the country among the healthy, sunburnt natives
of the hills. I assure you that they look quite handsome after the
yellow townsfolk. It would amuse our friends at home, if they could see
us the centre of a group of thirty or forty of these brown villagers,
in some out-of-the-way valley where Englishmen are about as often seen
as Chinamen in Yorkshire. They ask us all the most absurd questions
about ourselves, our clothes, and our dogs, who are quite as great
objects of wonder as ourselves. They never will believe that Nou-nou is
not some variety of sheep, and Saurin’s pointer, a very handsome young
dog of French royal breed, comes in for much admiration. The women
are all frightened at us, and keep well out of the way; we see them
timidly peering out of their doors at the foreign barbarians who kill
little children, and use their eyes for photography, but it is seldom
that anything but a stout old matron of great courage will venture to
come near us. The people are beginning to get rid of their prejudices
against us, and to see that we mean them no injury; at any rate they
are quite friendly, and seem to look upon us as harmless eccentric
creatures, but very ugly. As for personal safety, no one ever dreams of
carrying arms, either by day or by night, and nobody is ever insulted
or attacked.

We hear bad news of mercantile prospects in the south. Notwithstanding
their having been hit so hard last season, the merchants have been
speculating again more rashly than ever, and vying with each other
in buying up tea. The Chinese are quite up to this, and have leagued
together to raise prices. The nearer our merchants have got to the
tea-growing districts by means of the opening of new ports, the
dearer tea has become. Tea was never so cheap as when Canton was the
only outlet to the market. This seems a paradox, but it is easily
explained. The merchants competing to buy on the spot have caused
the Chinese growers to send up their prices to any height, and the
foreigner cannot transport the tea south so cheaply as the native,
so that both the original price paid to the farmers, and the cost of
transport, have been raised, and the merchants are paying the penalty
of their own hunger for new markets.

As a set-off against this bad news, we have good tidings with regard
to the rebels, who were in Shantung; they appear to be dispersed, some
south and some west, and the capital is safe. For once the Chinese can
lay the praise to themselves, they having acted without foreign aid.




                               LETTER IX


                                       PI YÜN SSŬ, _21st July 1865_.

I daresay you will be curious to hear something more of our temple life
than I have been able to tell you hitherto. We have been exploring the
neighbourhood in all directions, and certainly there is plenty to be
seen, although all the points of interest are temples, either Buddhist
or Taoist, and the description of one might hold good for all. The most
curious of these is at a distance from us of about a mile and a half;
it is called Wo-Fo-Ssŭ, “the temple of the Sleeping Buddha,” from a
huge sleeping idol which it contains, about 20 feet in length. At first
I thought the figure was meant for a female, a sort of Sleeping Beauty
in the Wood, but the attendant priest assured me that it was meant for
Buddha himself. The idol lies sleeping in a huge shrine, surrounded
by a number of lesser saints. His slippers, made of softest velvet
and satin, are lying at his feet ready for him to put on whenever it
shall suit his Holiness to get up; each of his attendants is likewise
provided with slippers. He has been sleeping now for more than 700
years, so he brings no great profit to the shoemaking trade. The shrine
is held in great reverence, and is decorated with an inscription
by the Emperor Chien-Lung himself, who seems never to have lost an
opportunity of writing and building; of both these favourite pastimes
of his, Wo-Fo-Ssŭ bears examples, for leading out of one of the courts
of the temple is a most beautiful little Imperial abode, now falling
into decay, like everything else here, but which once must have been
perfectly lovely. Of all the pavilions, courts, rockeries, and shrines,
the Lotus Pond alone remains in all its glory. Equally in ruins is an
Imperial hunting lodge, close by our temple, standing in the middle of
a deer-park which reaches up to the top of the mountain, fenced in by
a high wall. This, too, was a favourite resort of Chien-Lung, and he
must have spent a king’s ransom in decorating it; a gate or two, here
and there a summer-house, and one pagoda of yellow and green tiles,
show what it must once have been. But the whole place has crumbled to
pieces, and the deer and game stray at pleasure through what were once
the gorgeous apartments of the Emperor. The yellow tiles here, worked
in the highest relief with dragons, griffins, lions, and other emblems,
are marvellous specimens of potter’s work. Whole pediments are made in
small pieces and so cunningly joined together that they look like one
block. A very small annual expense would have kept the place in perfect
repair; but to keep in repair is not an Asiatic attribute. Alongside
one of the paths of the park, which is full of the most delightful
resting-places, I noticed the remains of what looked like a number of
stalls at a fancy-fair, and on inquiring I found that they were little
shops at which it was the privilege of the eunuchs of the palace to
sell trinkets and other trifles to the Emperor as he passed with his
wives.

Among other things that Chien-Lung did for these temples, he imported
from the palace of Jo Hol in Manchuria a quantity of a kind of tree
cigala, by Europeans called wee-wees from the noise they make, by the
Chinese called Tatsŭ-chi-liao. They are the most curious insects, and
make a clatter which is as if it were produced by the metal tongues
of an accordion. They go on all day and drive one nearly distracted.
Sometimes one can hardly hear oneself speak, but the Chinese delight in
them, and my teacher told me the story of their introduction as if he
had been speaking of an importation of nightingales. Happily at Peking
they declined to flourish; there we have only a lesser and more piano
sort, which it is an Imperial amusement at certain times of the year to
catch off the trees with long bamboo rods tipped with bird-lime. The
Chinese certainly find pleasure in what are to us very disagreeable
noises. Fancy a flight of pigeons with Eolian harps tied to their
tails! The first time I heard it above my head I thought something
dreadful must be going to happen. However, that fancy has a practical
side to it, for it keeps off the hawks which abound at Peking.

We have been revelling for two days in the very rare luxury of wet
weather. What a pleasure a real rainy day is in this burnt-up climate!
a day when the hills look as if they might be Scotch moors, and the
temples and pavilions as if they ought to melt away and be replaced
by the clubs in Pall Mall. On these wet days we wander about our own
place, of the size of which you may judge from the fact that one
building alone contains Buddha and his five hundred Lo-hans, or saints
of the third class, larger than life, just like the temple of which
I told you at Canton, where, however, they are smaller; then whole
courtyards are surrounded by buildings, in which heaven and hell are
represented by hundreds upon hundreds of wooden dolls. The Buddhist
heaven is a very queer place according to this view of it, where the
height of happiness seems to consist in riding a tiger or griffin, or
some equally uncomfortable mount; but hell is really too grotesque,
especially the ladies’ department, where the unfortunate women who have
sinned in this world are to be seen experiencing what is, to say the
very least of it, very inconsiderate treatment at the hands of a number
of lavender-kid-glove-coloured fiends. In the gentlemen’s department a
favourite punishment is for sinners to have their heads cut off, and
be compelled to walk about with them under their arms like a crush
hat at a ball. No description of mine could give you any idea of the
absurdity and ugliness of the idols and dolls. I can’t say that, so
far as I can judge, any real respect is paid to them. The people seem
to make sort of picnic parties here, quite as a matter of sightseeing,
rather than of religion, just as some tourists visit cathedrals for
their beauty and for the art treasures which they contain, and not as
an act of worship. However, they call visiting a temple “Kwang Miao,”
which means to do an act of respect and worship, so perhaps some may
attach a religious importance to it. The priests at our temple are a
lazy, brutish lot, and rather inclined to be insolent. At Wo-Fo-Ssŭ
they are far more respectable, and a man who was staying there told
me that they had constantly choral service in the temple, especially
at night; here I very rarely hear the bell and drum beat for prayers.
I must do our priests the justice to say that one day I offered one
of them a glass of wine, which their laws forbid, but their stomachs
crave for, and he refused, although there was no one by to have told
the tale, so I suppose they have a conscience somewhere and that they
regard its pricks.

I am sorry to say that by being out here we missed seeing the state
funeral of the famous general San-Ko-Lin-Sin. He was carried all the
way to Peking from Shantung, where he was killed, every mandarin on
the road being bound to furnish men to bear his body. The Emperor
pays the expense of his funeral and of his lying in state at Peking,
and went himself to pour a libation before the coffin. San-Ko-Lin-Sin
was a feudal Mongol prince, and his son has now been created a Wang,
or prince. There are many people who say that the general was not
killed by the rebels, but by his own troops. The account of his death,
however, was given with great details, and he was probably killed
fighting. “A corner of the Great Wall has gone,” say the Chinese, in
their picturesque way, when a great general is killed in battle.




                                LETTER X


                                                PEKING, _24th July_.

No mail in—we are expecting it any minute, but have begun to fear that
we must send off our bag before its arrival. I never saw anything so
curious as the change which the last few wet days have caused in all
the face of the country—its whole appearance is altered. What were
before arid and desert patches of sand are now turned into green and
luxuriant corn-fields—roads that were like dried water-courses, with
six inches of dust lying on them and banks of sand on each side, are
fresh English-looking lanes. The crops have sprung up to be so tall,
that we could not see our usual landmarks, and lost our way; for the
plain between Peking and the hills is so scarred and intersected by
roads and paths, that one has to make straight for some point in the
distance, or one is thrown out—all the houses and groups of cottages
are exactly like one another and afford no assistance in steering; it
is a regular Chinese puzzle. The thermometer has fallen from 108° in
the shade to 75°. Such a relief!—I hope that we have now got quit of
the very great heat.

By the bye, in my last letter I spoke about Chinese doctors and
prescriptions, and their doctrine of the hot and cold influences. My
teacher has been telling me about their principles of diagnosis. It
appears that they attach great importance to examining the tongue.
Now if the tongue is white the patient is under the cold influence.
If it is yellow, he is under the hot influence. If the centre of the
tongue is white, and the edges yellow, he is under the cold influence
inside, and his skin is under the hot—and so _vice versa_. Palmistry
and the study of the face and features are also brought to bear upon
medicine—certain conditions of feature portend certain events in the
future. My teacher told me that he feared he should not be long-lived,
because the lobe of his ear was small—a large lobe to the ear is much
admired on all accounts, but specially as a sign of wisdom, and Buddha
and the other idols are represented with huge appendages. A soft hand
is the sign of longevity; the eyes, nose and nostrils, and chin, all
have certain prophetic meanings to those who are wise to read them. I
told my teacher about phrenology—he was delighted with the idea, and
stood open-mouthed while his bumps were being felt. His character,
however, did not interest him much, but he was very anxious to know how
long he would live, and whether he would hold an office of any kind.

We have no news.




                               LETTER XI


                                          PEKING, _7th August 1865_.

The extreme heat has left us at last, and the autumn has set in—a most
charming season in this climate. It is a regular second spring—not
such a spring as we are used to in England, which is a struggle for
mastery between hot sun and chilling east winds, but a season in which
the burnt-up vegetation literally _springs_ into life again under the
influence of quickening rain and warmth—the trees put forth shoots
and tender green leaves, and the plain is one rich field of millet
twelve feet high, through which one rides feeling like Gulliver in
the farms of Brobdingnag. The rains have driven us out of our temple
at the hills, which I much regret, but it had become untenable lately
owing to damp; the scorpions, too, began to come into the house in
too great numbers to be pleasant; five were killed in my room in two
days, besides other creeping things. There were quantities of lizards
also in my house. The Chinese have an idea that lizards, which they
call scorpion-tigers, kill the scorpions by making them commit suicide
in this wise: the lizard touches the scorpion on the back with his
tail, the creature strikes at him, but the enemy is too quick, and he
stings himself instead; this is repeated until the lizard sees that the
scorpion’s poison is exhausted, when he goes at him at once and eats
him. We rather exploded this theory, for we caught two scorpions and
two lizards, and put them in a box with a glass cover, and the only
result was that the large scorpion ate the smaller, continuing his
cannibal feast during ten hours, and leaving nothing of him but the tip
of his tail; so we let the lizards go and killed the scorpion, whom
Shao-To, our head man, considered to have become doubly venomous as he
must have the poison of two in him.

Before leaving the hills we took a great walk over all the summits in
order to get a thorough idea of the country around. It looks as if the
sea, now about 100 miles off, must once have washed the foot of the
mountains, forming bays, promontories, and headlands into the plain,
which has the same appearance of being alluvial as that of Troy. The
numberless watercourses which intersect it show that formerly there
must have been a far greater flow of water towards the sea than is ever
seen now, even in the rainiest season. From the highest peak we had a
magnificent view of Peking, Yuen-Ming-Yuen, and the villages around,
and behind us was another range of mountains, more wild, more rugged
and picturesque than that on which we stood. It was raining slightly,
and as we watched there came on one of the strangest atmospheric
effects I ever saw. Between us and Peking there was a faint mist,
while over the city itself a heavy cloud was hanging, partly black and
partly lurid, with a sort of hellish glare about it that was perfectly
indescribable. All around us there was a deep blue gloom; it was such a
scene as Lot’s wife may have looked upon.

We rode into town the day before yesterday, and made a circuit so
as to take Yuen-Ming-Yuen, the famous summer palace, on our way. It
was a new road to me, and a very pleasant one. We passed several
Chinese villages, principally composed of soldiers’ barracks,
like elongated cow-sheds, and one very pretty prosperous-looking
little city. As we drew near the Imperial grounds the scenery became
prettier and prettier; above all there were shady groves, which were
doubly delightful for the scorching morning sun that was blazing
upon us. Quaint stone and marble bridges were thrown over the dykes
and water-channels, and little gables of pagodas, charged with the
inevitable tile gurgoyles, peeped out of the woods at intervals.

Yuen-Ming-Yuen (“the round bright garden”) is one of three parks
containing Imperial palaces, two of which were destroyed in 1860.
Some of the more out-of-the-way buildings in the third escaped notice
and destruction. The name Yuen-Ming-Yuen has been wrongly given by
Europeans to the whole, and still more wrongly to the only one of the
three parks (the third park is called Yu-Chuan-Shan, or the “Hill of
the Fountain of Jewels”) that can be seen, and which we visited. The
proper name of this is Wan-Shao-Shan, the “Hill of the Ten Thousand
Longevities,” which is a figure of speech for the fête day of the
Emperor or Empress. Of course it is against the orders of the Chinese
authorities that this is shown, but the guardians of the place make a
good profit out of it, and if they were caught they would always be
ready with the excuse that “the barbarians forced their way in and
would not be kept out.”

We were ushered through a number of courtyards, where there was nothing
to be seen but ruined and charred walls, and the ghosts of departed
pine-trees, and along a pretty covered walk to a pavilion by the lake
where we were to breakfast. It was a lovely spot. The lake is a mass
of lotus plants now in full flower; there are quantities of little
islands covered with trees and buildings. A number of boats with naked
fishermen in them gave a touch of wildness and barbarity to the scene,
and further added to our amusement; for one of the men, in the hopes of
finding Heaven knows what small loot among the masses of rubbish where
there is not so much as a tile left whole, had come on shore and was
lying hidden among the ruins; whom when the guardians perceived, they
set up such a game of hare and hounds, and such a throwing of stones
and bad language, as reminded me of Eton days when a boy from another
house was found in my dame’s without being able to give a good account
of himself. When the brave men returned all panting and out of breath,
they were very proud of themselves, and told us the story with much
vigour and dramatic action, for it was a very valiant deed, as they
were only three to one, “with power to add to their number.”

There is nothing like a Chinese servant for a picnic or expedition
of any kind, under whatever difficulties he may be placed. Shao-To
never lets us lack for anything. Even Dan, the pointer puppy, had his
usual mess of rice and broth, as if he had been at home. When we had
breakfasted, with an admiring crowd around us, we went to explore the
ruins. It is difficult to form any idea of what the palace must have
been like, so complete has the work of destruction been. We scrambled
up and down steep steps (that must have been hard work for the poor
little cramped feet that trod them) and along terraces where the wild
vines and creepers, and sweet-scented weeds, now grow in tangled
masses; there is not a stone that has not been split by the action
of the fire. Two colossal marble kylins, of rare workmanship, are
seared with cracks, and have almost fallen away in flakes. Of the great
octagonal three-storied palace, not one stone lies on another, and a
white marble balustrade alone shows where it stood. Higher up there are
still a few remains untouched by fire. There is a little bronze temple,
a perfect gem, which of course escaped, and two little revolving wooden
pagodas full of small gods and images standing in a tower were also
preserved; whilst above all a larger temple, built entirely of the
yellow and green tiles I have so often described to you, shows what a
blaze of glory the place must once have been. But that glory has passed
away now, and so rapidly does ruin work in this climate, that soon even
the little that remains to-day will perish. There is one very curious
device thoroughly Chinese that I must mention. At the end of the
terrace by the lake a sort of jetty stands out, built of huge blocks of
stone, in the shape of a junk being launched into the lake, forty-one
paces long by nine broad. Some of the rockwork is very quaint. When
the Chinese come upon a quaintly-shaped rock or stone they mount it
on a pedestal and make an ornament of it. There are many very curious
specimens at Wan-Shao-Shan.

With regard to the destruction of the summer palace, I believe that,
politically speaking, it was a mistake. It was necessary that some
great reprisal should be made for the outrages committed by the
Chinese; but the destruction should have taken place inside the
city, and not twelve miles off; for so ignorant are the large body
of the Chinese of what passes outside their four walls, that there
are many here in Peking who to this day believe that we had to pay an
indemnity for leave to withdraw our troops, and that we are only here
on sufferance. If this is the case in Peking, in the provinces people
must be still further from the truth, and it is the policy of the
Government to keep up the delusion. Had the Imperial palace in Peking
been destroyed the matter would have been notorious to all, and its
recollection would not have been blown away with the last cloud of
smoke from Yuen-Ming-Yuen.

Here is some more Chinese doctoring which may amuse you. A boy was
brought the other day to the hospital of the London Mission with
slight feverish symptoms. The doctor not being at home, the boy was
taken by his parents to a Chinese practitioner, who prescribed a
decoction of three scorpions, to be taken internally! The boy was well
next day in spite of it.

A recipe for ophthalmia, posted on the walls of Peking, runs as
follows:—Take three bright brass coins of the reign of Tao Kwang, boil
them in water, and use the lotion. Here is our old saw, “A hair of
the dog that bit you,” worked in practice: For a dog bite, catch the
dog, pull out a few of his hairs, and work them into a paste with a
little lime and oil—apply the paste to the wound; of course, the lime
acting as a caustic is the real remedy, but the hair is the one that is
believed in.

The Legation is at present giving hospitality to a certain gentleman
who is accredited by a small state to make a treaty with the Chinese,
as he pompously announces “dans l’intérêt de la Chine même”; if he
does not talk less big at the Tsung-Li Yamên, or Foreign Office, he
will find the Chinese far less tractable than he seems to think it
their duty to be; for they are much too sharp to suppose that anybody
comes out here to negotiate treaties in their interest without having
a still keener eye upon his own; and as for themselves, of course
the mandarins, at any rate, would rather return to the old state of
things, have nothing to do with us and our treaties, and sacrifice
the revenue that accrues to them from their customs. The pressure
put upon them from abroad, and the counsels of Mr. Hart, the Chinese
Inspector-General of Customs, and a very able man, alone keep them
straight, and compel the central Government to assume responsibilities
which they would rather leave to the provincial authorities. Fancy
the difficulty of stirring up into action men whose highest idea of
celestial happiness is an eternity passed in the contemplation of their
own paunches, in the society of Buddha and his Lo-hans.

It is very hard upon our interpreters that they should have to do
the work of other missions besides our own. These ministers of other
states come up here without any staff whatever, and the whole of their
business falls upon the Legation to whose good offices they may be
intrusted.




                               LETTER XII


                                         PEKING, _22nd August 1865_.

Since I last wrote to you we have been leading the most monotonous of
lives, and no news from home has come to cheer us. We have had staying
with us one of the few stray visitors that chance drives up here—a Mr.
R——, an officer in the commissariat, and a very pleasant companion he
was; he came fresh from Japan, and full of stories about Yokohama and
Yedo, but out here we should prefer to hear about London. There really
is little temptation to travellers to come here now, for, thanks to
the misbehaviour of certain of our countrymen, the Chinese have shut
up the principal lions of the town, and the temples of Heaven, and
of Confucius, are not shown, even to members of the Legations. I for
one have not been able to visit them. The great Lama Temple is still
to be seen, and to any one who has not seen a Chinese temple, is a
great show; but they are all very like one another, the main difference
being merely a question of size. It is very provoking to be kept out of
really interesting sights by the brutality of travelling bullies who
will force their way into places where they have no right to go.

All we can do now for our visitors is to show them the panorama of the
two cities from the walls, the top of which forms a ride or walk right
round Peking, and where the wonderful observatory of the old Jesuit
fathers, with its beautiful bronze instruments, still stands, and to
take them through the streets and over the curio shops—braving offence
given to eyes and nostrils. The curio shops especially make up an
amusing day, and I am always glad of an excuse to go there. There is a
bazaar, too, just inside the Chinese city, a sort of Lowther Arcade on
a small scale, where toys, scents, sham jewellery, cheap embroidery,
and other rubbish are sold, and which is quite worth seeing. This is
greatly patronised by the Mongols, who never weary of admiring the
showy trash exposed for sale. The Mongols are to the Pekingese what
the Auvergnats are to the _gamins de Paris_, or a bumpkin come up to
London for the cattle-show to the cabbies and ’busmen. They are the
perpetual butts of jokes, sells, and cheatery, and are done at every
opportunity. The bazaar leads on to the Beggar’s Bridge, with its mass
of rotting humanity, a place that it makes one shudder to think of, and
once past that we are well in the Chinese city. The amount of traffic
is always very great, and it is no easy matter to thread one’s way
through the crowd of mules, carts, horses, and footpads, and the worst
of it is that one is continually hustled up against some unhappy leper,
whose only clothing is dirt and sores. The neatness and nicety of the
shops are a great contrast to the filth and squalor of the streets
themselves. Inside everything is as clean as water can make it; outside
is a dunghill, where the beggars are disputing with the dogs and pigs
the right to water-melon rinds, rotten vegetables, and dead carrion.
The street hawkers are a great feature; of course they all have their
peculiar cries as in Europe; but in addition to this each trade has its
own announcement in the shape of some instrument—one trade carries a
thing like a huge Jew’s harp, another has a tiny gong, a third a drum,
a fourth beats two pieces of bamboo together, and so forth. All these
make a terrible clatter, and the noise is increased by the beggars, who
take up a position opposite some shop—a cook-house for choice—and there
make themselves odious to eyes, ears, and nostrils until its owner can
stand it no longer and buys them off with a copper cash or piece of
refuse food. Among Chinese street characters the _improvisatore_ is
one of the foremost. He is as loud and fluent as his Italian compeer,
and infinitely more energetic. He generally accompanies himself on the
bones, but often has a little boy to beat a drum for him. He works
himself into a regular frenzy, and jumps about like one possessed of
a devil; he dances and gesticulates and raves until the sweat runs
down his face; but nothing tires him, and he never halts nor pauses in
his chant. These men are too nimble of speech and too slang for most
foreigners to catch a word; but I suppose they are generally witty and
entertaining, for they command immense audiences of gaping Chinamen,
and their sallies are received with great delight. Like the Italians,
when they have worked up their audience to a proper pitch of interest
they stop, and refuse to go on with the story without more coppers. At
the approach of the foreign barbarian some little witticism is launched
_à notre adresse_. You may judge whether it is very complimentary;
however, as “it amuses them and don’t hurt us,” that don’t much
signify. Perhaps the hawkers whose wares are the most curious to
Europeans are the men who carry about live crickets and cicadas for
sale, either in tiny wooden cages or tied to bamboo rods. The Chinese
buy them to any amount as pets, and some make the crickets fight like
quails and game-cocks.

We are very often accosted by the more respectable class. The first
salutation is always, “Have you had your dinner, sir?” which is the
Chinese, “How d’ye do?” and then the conversation runs as follows:—

“Your honourable name?”

“My name is Mi. What is your honourable name?”

“My shabby name is Hwang. What are the years of your age?”

“I am twenty-eight” (great astonishment, for I pass usually for
forty-five).

“How long have you been inside the walls?” (at Peking).

“About four months.”

“Do you belong to the great Ying, or the great Fa?” (English or French).

Then follow a string of the most absurd questions about England. One
man asked one day whether it was true that in Europe there were men
with holes through their chests and backs, whom their servants carried
about by passing a bamboo pole through the hole and so hoisting them on
to their shoulders. Such is the Chinese education, that one of their
scholars, deeply read in ethics and Confucian books, would be capable
of asking questions to the full as ridiculous as the above, which,
indeed, was put by an educated man.

After the din, bustle, and dirt of the streets, it is very refreshing
to go into one of the shops, where there is always the civillest
welcome, even though one may buy nothing. In almost all cases the
master of the house gives us delicious tea, sugarless and milkless of
course, but of the most exquisite flavour. The infusion is made in a
small covered bowl; I have hardly ever seen a teapot. The outer shop
is for the most part only, as it were, an advertisement, and contains
nothing but trash: one of the finest shops here exhibits to the street
a front such as a Cheap Jack at a fair might show; but go inside,
and cross a little courtyard into the inner sanctum, and you will be
dazzled by the beauty of the ornaments and trinkets for sale. There
is a certain black _étagère_ made of ebony, carved to represent very
light bamboo stems supporting irregular niches, filled with carved
lapis-lazuli, jade, cornelians, agates, and other rare stones, that I
should like to carry off bodily. Every piece in the collection is a
_chef-d’œuvre_. The prices are, of course, outrageous, but they come
down; indeed, it is curious that a people so proverbially cunning in
trade should act as they do. Supposing that they ask thirty dollars
for a thing, we offer fifteen, which, at first, will be indignantly
rejected; but after perhaps three months of bargaining the man will
come down to our price, thus keeping himself for three months out of
the interest of his money. There is some beautiful porcelain, but very
dear. I have never seen any of the rose-backed plates or cups that
are so much prized at home; and two or three of the dealers, whom
I have asked about them, had never heard of such things. There is
plenty of bad cloisonné enamel about; but the fine specimens came from
Yuen-Ming-Yuen, and the Chinese were obliged to sell them off as fast
as they could for fear of the law. (I take it the natives had a great
hand in the looting.) I only know of two really magnificent pieces, for
which the owner asks £1000! He would probably take £300, and they would
be a great bargain at the price. They are two colossal covered bowls,
without flaw or fault, and would look splendid at Windsor or some very
great house. I have written to a friend to tell him of them.

The best chance of picking up here and there a pretty thing is in
the minor shops, from which the bigger ones are recruited. There is
a street called the Liu-li-chang, which swarms with old book shops
(a sort of Paternoster Row) and curiosity shops, some of which are
hardly more than stalls, where sometimes one may find a piece of fine
porcelain, or other work of art, for an old song.

I start after to-morrow morning for Ku-Pei-Ko̔u, to see the Great Wall,
and I shall return by way of the tombs of the emperors of the Ming
dynasty; so at any rate I shall not have to sing the eternal refrain,
“Peking is very dirty.” I shall be about eight days gone. The trip was
originally to have been undertaken with the Russian Minister, but he is
detained by business, so I go with Murray, and we accompany Saurin as
far as Ku-Pei-Ko̔u, whence he will travel into Mongolia, and Murray and
I shall come back.

One more word about the Beggar’s Bridge: often one of the poor
creatures will die at his post, and I have seen the corpse lie there
for two or three days hardly covered over by a piece of rotten matting.
His troubles and miseries are over. The beggars are, I am told, a sort
of guild with a recognised head, to whom it is not an infrequent custom
to pay a slight annual tribute, by which means their importunities,
such as taking up a position outside a man’s door or shop, and refusing
to “move on,” may be avoided, and their piteous cry, “Ko̔ Lien! Ko̔
Lien!” (Have mercy! have mercy!) no longer heard. Begging throughout
Asia is a fine art.




                              LETTER XIII


                                       PEKING, _5th September 1865_.

I returned on Saturday from my trip to the Great Wall; I must try and
give you some account of it.

We started on the 25th August, as I told you before. Saurin and Frater,
one of the student interpreters, were going to make a journey in
Mongolia, and Murray and I accompanied them to the frontier.

Each party had three servants—a man to look after clothes, bedding, and
things in general, a cook, and a groom; but besides these our people
took with them _their_ servant, a queer little oddity of a Chinaman,
very dirty, in an old English sailor’s pea-jacket, much too big for
him, which earned him the name of the “Skipper.” I never saw such
a merry, willing little creature; he was always at work and always
laughing, as if everything he did were a capital joke, and the very
fact of his being in the world at all something so ridiculous that he
really couldn’t get over it.

I need tell you little of our first day’s journey, as far as regards
scenery. I had never seen that part of the plain which lies north-east
of Peking, but it is exactly like the rest, which I have often
described to you. We breakfasted at a place called Sun-Ho, about
thirteen miles hence; soon after that the country became prettier.
We passed some cosy villages with fine old willows; from these one
is called Ku-Lin-Shu, the “Old Willow Trees,” and here we stopped to
rest during the great heat of the day at the tea-shop. As usual, all
the people were very civil and talkative. One elderly man, whose name
was Ma, a Mohammedan, and evidently the village politician, was very
communicative; he was a great Tory, and _laudator temporis acti_,
abusing the present dynasty, and sighing over the “good old days” of
the Mings. I gave him a cigar, which he took with great delight, and
jumped up on to a little low wall, where he sat perched with his hams
on his heels like an old bird, and went on with his denunciation of
the Tartars. “Ugh!” said he, “they have not got a good officer among
all their mandarins. They brought us into the war with foreign powers,
and then when they saw the big men and the big horses, and heard the
poum-poum-poum of the cannon, what did they do? Why, they ran away and
left us to pay for it all.”

We slept at a place called Niu-Lan-Shan, near which there are some
marshes with herons and wild-fowl. A Chinese inn is very unlike our
notions of an inn. It is generally built round the four sides of
a courtyard; the guests’ house is at the bottom, facing north and
south. East and west are stalls for mules, horses, and donkeys; the
remaining side is occupied by the people of the house. The inn-yard
is very animated—carts, pigs, horses, mules, dogs, flocks of pigeons,
and poultry are crowded into it, besides poor travellers, Chinese and
Mongol. Then there are generally a travelling barber plying his trade
in one corner, a pedlar haggling for a few cash in another, and all the
idle vagabonds who seem to comprise the greater part of the population
of every place in Northern China, and who come in to loaf about and
make remarks about the foreigners. There is no great variety or
originality in these. There is always a fugleman, who makes a remark,
and then the crowd take it up in chorus. The following is really a fair
specimen of the sort of thing they say about us:—

_Fugleman_—“Those boots! They are made of scented cow’s leather”
(Russia leather).

_Chorus_—“Those boots! They are made of scented cow’s leather.”

_Fugleman_—“Those boots! He that wears them need not fear water.”

_Chorus_ (admiringly)—“Those boots! He that wears them,” etc.

_Fugleman_ (to one of us)—“Those boots! How much did they cost?”

_Englishman_—“They cost fourteen taels.”

_Fugleman_—“Those boots! They cost fourteen taels, and he speaks the
mandarin language.”

_Chorus_-“They cost fourteen taels, and he speaks the mandarin
language”—and so it goes on _ad infinitum_. If we are in a good humour
we give the fugleman a cigar, which he puffs at vigorously, and swears
“it is both strong and fragrant”; but it makes him cough violently,
and he passes it on to the next in the crowd, until the whole of them
retire, coughing and declaring that it is “both strong and fragrant,”
into a corner, from which every now and then we hear “those boots” all
over again.

The rooms of the inn are very bare indeed; the only furniture is a
table with two chairs, and the only _vaisselle_ provided is a teapot
and bowls, all guests being expected to bring their own bedding, food,
and comforts. On each door is pasted a print of a god in staring
colours. The lintels and posts of the inner doors are covered with
characters printed on red paper, which are generally moral reflections
from the works of Confucius, such as, “All happiness comes from
Heaven,” “To become wealthy you must have the principle of right.”
On the wall is generally hung a picture. I saw one of a sage with a
forehead like a misshapen pear, lecturing before two warriors upon
the Yang and Yin (the universal principle of nature); another of a
yellow elephant in spectacles, his body, legs, and trunk covered with
characters, with two gentlemen in blue eating their dinner comfortably
under his stomach, while a third was offering a stalk of millet to
a lady in pink, who modestly turned her head aside as she accepted
the present; this was a sort of Chinese farmer’s Moore’s almanack,
indicating the propitious times for sowing, reaping, etc. Besides the
centre picture, the walls are often covered with drawings by poor
travelling artists, who earn a night’s lodging by the skill of their
pencil. Some of their productions, when they don’t attempt figures or
beasts, are very clever. I have seen in the most out-of-the-way inns
sketches of bamboo, grasses, flowers, and birds, that were dashed
off in a way that would have done credit to well-known names. If
the traveller be a poor scholar, as such are always proud of their
caligraphy, he will, instead of a drawing, contribute quotations from
the philosophers or poets, or a few verses in praise of the landlord
and his honesty, and declaring how his (the poor scholar’s) heart had
laughed during the period of their intercourse. Every room has in it
a ka̔ng; this is a large stove about 2½ feet high, covered with a mat
or piece of felt, taking up all one side of the room, and serving as a
bed. In winter the Chinese, like the Russians, bake themselves every
time they go to sleep.

There came on a fearful thunderstorm in the night, with a deluge of
rain, which gave us some uneasiness, as we had several rivers ahead of
us which we feared might become unfordable, as indeed turned out to
be the case. However, the only inconvenience we suffered was in loss
of time, for when we arrived next morning at the first river we found
huge ferry-boats, worked by strapping Chinamen stark naked; it took us
nearly two hours to get our carts, mules, and horses across. We amused
ourselves the while in watching a swine-herd’s vain endeavours to make
his flock swim the stream, the opposition being led by a stubborn
little curly-tail, with a majority in his favour. The consumption of
pork at Peking must be something fabulous. The streets swarm with pigs,
and yet from every direction we saw large herds being driven into the
town. The Chinese who can afford it eat pork at nearly every meal. We
found an encampment of Mongols on the river-bank. They were on their
way homeward from Peking, where they had been selling horses. They
seemed very good-humoured, honest people, simple and primitive to a
degree, as amused as children with our watches, clothes, saddles, and
other belongings.

It is very strange, the farther one gets from the capital, to see
an improvement in everything. The fields are better cultivated, the
houses are better built, and the villages far cleaner than the town.
Fifteen miles out of Peking all the indecencies and filthiness which
are its characteristics disappear entirely; a man would be stoned if
he were to venture upon outraging decency as the Pekingese do; the
poor peasants are more polite and less inquisitive about us, although
foreigners so rarely appear among them, which makes one think that the
inquisitiveness is sometimes only studied impertinence. We saw several
farmhouses with pretty gardens and neat out-houses, which might have
stood in an English shire, so free were they from all stamp of China.
The people seemed well-to-do, and the farmers positively rich. We met
a lady going out to spend the day with her gossip, dressed as smart as
a new pin, and carrying her baby in her arms. She was riding a donkey,
which, as soon as one of our vicious little Mongol ponies set eyes on,
he made a dash at the ass and upset him and the lady and the baby,
happily on to a bank, for had she fallen in the muddy lane there would
have been an end to all her finery. As it was, she was let off for a
good fright. “Ai ya! what manners are these! what manners are these!”
she cried indignantly as she struggled on to her tiny goat’s feet. We,
of course, made all the apologies possible, and she bestrode her ass
and rode off pacified—more or less.

The principal place that we passed on this day (August 26) was
Mi-Yün-Hsien, a walled city. We did not enter the city, but skirted the
walls. Outside the gate there stands a guard-house, and near this there
is a tall blasted tree. It has neither leaf nor sprout, but from its
whitened branches there hang small wooden cages, and in each cage is a
human head, at which the carrion-birds are pecking. A ghastly fruit!

At a little place called Shi-ling I saw the prettiest woman I have ever
met in China. She was a widow, and really looked quite lovely in her
white dress and fillet, which she wore as weeds. She had a clear olive
complexion, abundance of black hair, dark eyes, and regular features.
Women’s dress in this country show nothing of the figure; but we all
agreed that she _must_ have had a good figure; alas! her feet had been
tortured and deformed. This is commonly supposed to be the difference
between pure Chinese women and Tartars. As a matter of fact, I am
assured that it is a question of family custom, some Tartar families
adopting it, while some Chinese families do not. The poor serving wench
who has her feet deformed must be sadly hampered in her work.

We slept at Mu-Chia-Yu. The next morning (August 27) we started in good
time, for we wished to reach Ku-Pei-Ko̔u early that day. Although the
ride of the day before had been very pretty, increasing in beauty as
we drew near to the mountains, I was hardly prepared for such glorious
scenery as we passed through on this day. The road lay over and between
hillocks and rocks covered with ferns, mosses, and wild-flowers, and
before us were the mountains with blue distances and fantastic outlines
for a landscape-painter to revel in. Over the tops of the highest hills
the Great Wall of China traced a zigzag course, like a distant chain.
Rich crops of millet and Indian corn, with undergrowths of beans or
buckwheat, bordered with the castor-oil plant, stood in the valleys
and in the plain. The cottages of the different villages had an air
of comfort and tidiness rare in China; almost every one had a little
flower-garden fenced in by a hedge of millet stalks, trailed over
with gourds, convolvulus, and vines. In some places the people were
gathering in the smaller sort of millet; they were cutting the ears
separately with a small knife, as a gardener would gather a dish of
fruit or vegetables.

The only instance of hostility towards a foreigner on the part of the
people I have met with hitherto happened on this day. Frater and I were
riding about 200 yards ahead of the party when, just as we arrived at
a crossroad, and were doubting which way to take, up came a party of
about a dozen Chinamen with a cart. We, according to good manners,
“borrowed the light of their intelligence,” and asked our way, which
they pointed out, paying us at the same time the compliment of asking
whether we had eaten our dinner. I think I told you that the common
salutation is, “Have you had your dinner?” The literal translation of
the phrase is, “Have you eaten rice.”[8] _Rice_ has passed into the
generic term for all meals. _Early rice_ is breakfast, _late rice_ is
dinner. _The rice is prepared_ is the equivalent of Mr. Bailey Junior’s
“the wittles is up.” In short, amenity and deportment could be pushed
no further. To our surprise a few moments after Saurin and Murray
rode up looking hot and angry, and asking us whether we had had any
difficulty with these same men. It appeared that, as Saurin was riding
past the cart, the man inside, in the most unprovoked way, struck him
in the chest with his brass pipe. Murray was riding just behind him
and saw the blow struck, and from their account of what took place I
doubt whether the man will ever insult a foreigner again. His friends
all took part against him, but interceded for him, crying, “Be calm, be
calm; he has had enough.” At any rate he got a good whipping.

The sun was scorching hot, and it was a great relief to come upon a
pretty village-green, at one end of which stood a small tea-shop,
shaded by a covering of millet-straw and by a broad-spreading tree: our
horses needed a rest as much as ourselves; they had been driven nearly
mad by the flies and by one venomous little insect in particular,
which must have been the original gadfly that persecuted Io. It has
a long sheath in its tail, out of which it shoots a sting into the
horses’ flanks, apparently out of pure mischief, for it never seems to
suck them, and it follows a horse or mule for miles. If one attacked
our horses, the only way to get rid of it was to dismount and kill it.
So sharp is its sting that every time it touched our beasts they jumped
up as if they had been shot. We were all glad of a friendly shelter.

We found a party of Chinamen playing dominoes. They were playing the
game more as we do cards than dominoes, but I could not make out the
principle of it. The landlord was a very jolly, burly fellow, the
picture of a host with whom everything prospered, although he must
have been poor enough, for instead of tea he was drinking an infusion
of dried leaves of jujube that is common on the hills. In some places
where there is no tea to be had the people drink a sort of barley
water, and very good it is. At these tea-shops guests are expected to
bring their own tea-leaves. The house supplies only the pot and the
boiling water.

Almost every man and woman (I am not exaggerating) that we met in
this part of the valley had goitres, not so bad as those one meets in
the Swiss valleys, but far more numerous. In one village we saw eight
fullgrown men and women only—out of the eight seven had goitres.

Overlooking the village-green I mentioned above is a fort commanding
the plain; and on one side of the fort the road has been cut through
the solid rock and arched over with strong masonry, so as to form a
gate, which bears the legend, “The Gate of the Southern Heavens.”
Through this gate there is a most gorgeous view of the different
ranges, the Great Wall, and the approach to Ku-Pei-Ko̔u.

Ku-Pei-Ko̔u is in its way one of the most strikingly beautiful places
that I have ever seen. The valley by which it is reached, with rocks,
ferns, mosses, gardens, and a little rivulet sparkling in the sunlight,
is a gem. The town itself stands in a little nest among the hills which
surround it; on one side of it runs a river, on the farther bank of
which, in a grove of trees, is the yamên or official residence of the
Ti-tu (the general officer commanding the district). There is not a
point in the whole place from which there is not something attractive
to rest one’s eyes on. The streets are clean, the houses well built,
and the shops seem to do a prosperous business. At one end of the town
is the frontier gate of China; it is strongly guarded, and ingress or
egress without passport is forbidden. Besides the walls of the city, as
a guard against Mongol tribes, on the river side are two little ditches
that a man might easily hop over, and two little pieces of cannon which
look more dangerous to friend than to foe. We walked outside the gate
to stand beyond the confines of China proper. The guard were extremely
civil, the sentry politely inviting us into the guard-room to drink
tea! The Chinese attach a great deal of importance to Ku-Pei-Ko̔u as a
border fortress. They keep up a garrison of two thousand men, of whom
ten per cent are Tartars and the rest Chinese.

The inn here is the largest I have been in yet. The enormous traffic
which passes through the town keeps its business brisk. The landlord
was a Tientsing man, and a man of letters, having taken the degree
equivalent to our B.A. Degrees in China are conferred by competitive
examination, only a certain number of candidates being elected each
time. The examinations are held at Peking, and people come from all
parts of the empire to compete. Some time back an old gentleman aged
100 presented himself from the south for examination. He received the
degree of B.A. by Imperial favour, and with it a present of 2 lbs. of
gin-seng, which is a powerful aphrodisiac and tonic. It is from the
successful candidates that the offices of the empire are filled, and
in former days it was the highest ambition of a Chinaman to pass the
schools in order to qualify himself for office. Now, however, a race
has sprung up of men who are indifferent to public honours, and prefer
their private advantage. Of these was our host. Why, he argued, should
he go through all the petty annoyances and humiliations which inferior
mandarins suffer at the hands of their superiors for the possible
chance of rising to distinction, when he could enjoy certain comfort
in trade? Many people deny the existence of this feeling among the
lettered class, but it exists nevertheless. Office, both civil and
military, can also be obtained by purchase.

As I was sitting smoking and reading an old number of a magazine
outside my room, the landlord came up and began asking me many
questions about what I was reading, and why we read from left to right
instead of in columns from right to left. About half an hour after I
heard him in the inn-yard delivering a lecture to an admiring audience
of grooms, muleteers, and riffraff, upon the English language, the
point of which was that we wrote exactly as the Manchus do, who write
in columns from left to right! Seeing me come he borrowed my book and
proceeded to give practical illustrations of what he had said, holding
it upside down. This exhibition of learning was received with awe by
the gaping crowd. He was a great character, this same landlord, a
confirmed opium smoker, and being a man of letters, which is something
more thought of here than being of good birth is in Europe, he had an
immense number of friends and acquaintances of good standing of whom
he was very proud. He took me into his own little house, which he had
papered completely with the crimson visiting-cards of his intimates.

Our first object at Ku-Pei-Ko̔u was to get the seal of the Ti-tu
affixed as a _visa_ to our passports. All over the provinces of China
the central authorities count as nothing in comparison with the local;
a small mandarin who would laugh to scorn the seal of the Imperial
Foreign Office will bow to the earth before that of his immediate
superior. Accordingly, on the evening of our arrival we sent our
Shao-To, the apostle, to the Yamên with our cards to beg the Ti-tu
to grant us his seal. He came back discomfited, not having been able
even to see an official of any rank. The next morning, however, he
proposed to return to the charge, and arraying himself in his best,
with his head shaven and his tail freshly plaited, he ordered out one
of the carts and called upon the skipper to attend him. Here arose a
difficulty: our servants all declared that the skipper must abandon
his old pea-jacket as unbefitting the dignity of the situation; he as
firmly stuck to wearing it, but public opinion was too strong for him,
and he was forced to give up his favourite garment and appear in a
dirty nankin jacket. In spite of the imposing splendour of this embassy
it was fruitless, the authorities declaring that they had received
no special instructions from Peking, and that without them they could
not grant the seal. This was very provoking; the seal was necessary to
us, we had a right to ask for it, and we were determined to have it,
the more especially as if we, holding an official position here, had
foregone our rights, other travellers would necessarily have had double
difficulty in obtaining it in future. Murray determined to go himself
and demand to see the Ti-tu. He was shown into a dirty room full of
soldiers, and the Chinese tried to foist a wretched white-buttoned
mandarin upon him as the Ti-tu. He of course was not to be taken in
by this childish piece of chicanery, and as soon as it became evident
that he knew what he was about the big doors were thrown open, and he
was ushered with due solemnity into the presence of the Ti-tu, who
made many apologies for having kept him waiting, and received him with
much ceremony. Murray had the satisfaction of being served with tea
and sweetmeats by the very impostor who had tried to pass himself off
as the great man! About the question of putting on the seal the Ti-tu
fenced for a long while. He had no orders. He might get into a scrape.
What right had we to ask it? Murray explained the treaty to him, and
he admitted our claim. But no sooner were the passports produced than
he raised another objection. The seal of the British Legation was
in the centre, that of the Imperial Foreign Office on the left, and
there was no more room on the left of that again for his seal—what
could be done? His rank was too high for his seal to be placed below.
“Well,” said Murray, “put your seal on the right of ours, and then we
shall be figuratively between the protection of the civil and military
authorities of China.” This little bit of nonsense was the very thing
to please the Chinese mind, and the seal was set without more delay,
Murray undertaking to explain the matter at Peking. “I know you’ll do
it,” said the Ti-tu, “for when an Englishman promises a thing he does
it.”

I mention this to show you how business is transacted in China.
The most important affairs are conducted with the same amount of
childishness and trickery as our little passport difficulty with the
Ti-tu of Ku-Pei-Ko̔u, who, be it recollected, is an officer of the
highest rank.

We spent the afternoon on the Great Wall. The Chinese name for
this most marvellous work is Wan-Li-Cha̔ng-Che̔ng—literally the
myriad-li-long wall. Calculating the li at a third of a mile, this
name would give it a length of nearly 3400 miles, but the English
books estimate it at 1250 miles. It was built by the Emperor Shih
of the Chi̔n dynasty about 230 years b.c. as a barrier against the
northern tribes, or more probably as an evidence of power. He was the
same Emperor who burnt the books of the sages, thus rendering himself
famous by two works—one of construction, the other of destruction. The
wall near Ku-Pei-Ko̔u is for the most part in very good repair, but in
other places it is little more than a heap of rubbish; where we saw
it, it is built of large blocks of granite, huge bricks and cement,
and the centre filled in with rubble and concrete. It is some fifteen
feet broad and twenty feet high; at regular intervals are quadrilateral
towers about forty feet high, built of granite with embrasures—some
of these are quite perfect, others in ruin; wild vines, asparagus,
bluebells, low shrubs, and other plants grow in profusion among the
débris, and the towers are covered with silver-backed ferns and
mosses. For miles and miles as far as our eyes could stretch, up hill
and down dale, up precipices almost perpendicular, and over the highest
peaks, we traced the course of the wall; when we thought we had fairly
lost sight of it our glasses would light on some distant crag carrying
it on still farther. How so much material could have been got together
in such wild and inaccessible spots is a marvel.

Even without the attraction of the Great Wall, the height on which we
stood would have been well worth visiting. Range above range of hills
rose all round us; on one side were the wilds of Mongolia, on the other
the plains of China. At our feet lay the little town with its absurd
fortification and ditches and cannon, and the river flowing past it.
The mountain view was only bounded by the limits of our sight.

We lingered long on the wall, looking and wondering at the beauty of
the scene. We gathered some ferns and mosses, of which I send you
some, and by dint of hardish work, for it was no light weight to carry
under a broiling sun, I managed to bring off a trophy in the shape of
one of the big bricks. I have got it safe in my room here, after many
vicissitudes, for it was often nearly left behind, and some day I hope
to take it home.

We left Ku-Pei-Ko̔u the next morning, going our several ways—Saurin and
Frater to Mongolia, Murray and I to the Tombs of the Mings, which I
must tell you about in another letter.

[Illustration: The symbol of Yang and Yin]

As you interest yourself about Chinese curiosities and antiquities, I
will add a few words about the Yang and Yin, to which I alluded in the
early part of my letter.

You may have noticed on old porcelain and other ornaments this device.
It is the symbol of Yang and Yin, the universal male and female
principle of creation to which everything is referred. The celestial
principle is male, the terrestrial female; even plants are male and
female, without reference, of course, to the sexual system of Linnæus;
odd numbers are male, even numbers female. Day and the sun male, night
and the moon female. Parts of the body, the lungs, the heart, the
liver, etc., each have a sex. Sir John Davis compares with this the
Egyptian and Brahmin mythologies (_The Chinese_, vol. ii. p. 67).




                               LETTER XIV


                                          PEKING, _25th Sept. 1865_.

In my last letter I told you how we went to Ku-Pei-Ko̔u. We turned
homewards (that I should talk of Peking as home!) on the 29th of
August. I began my backward journey unluckily. My horse had a sore
back, which no nostrum in the pharmacopœia of a dirty old Chinese
veterinary surgeon could heal in time for me to ride him, so I had to
go in a cart. Our first day’s journey was back over the road by which
we had arrived as far as Mi-Yün-Hsien, a distance of five-and-thirty
miles—no great things, to be sure; but the average pace was three miles
an hour; the road was full of deep ruts, and rendered doubly uneven
by rocky passages and big stones. The carts have no springs; at every
jolt I was banged up against the hard sides, and by the evening my
back was as sore as my horse’s. After ten hours of a Chinese cart
a man is fit for little else than to be sold at an old rag and bone
shop. Misfortunes never come single; when I arrived at Mi-Yün-Hsien,
jaded and aching in every bone, the inns refused to take us in; this
was of very small account, for persuasion and threats soon brought the
people to reason. The only cause they had to give for their reluctance
to house us, was that last year some foreigners had stayed there, and
instead of paying for their night’s lodging had beaten the landlord
when he asked for his money; such are some of the travellers who come
to these parts, and who defeat all our efforts to conciliate the
people. However, we convinced the host that we neither wished to cheat
nor to beat him, and he, when he felt safe on both scores, was willing
enough to be civil. But during the altercation, which had attracted a
great crowd, my pocket-book was picked out of my pocket, which was a
serious loss, for it contained a heap of notes, rough sketches, and
plans, that I had made on different excursions, and our passport. We
offered a reward for its recovery, and sent to the Chih-hsien, or
governor of the town, to ask his help, which he sent in the shape of
two officers, who came and knelt before us very humbly, but offered no
suggestions for getting back my book, which I shall now certainly never
see again.

We had two days’ journey from Mi-Yün-Hsien to Chang-Ping-Chou. As the
road lay on one side of the highway, the villages were smaller, poorer,
and more insignificant than any we had come to yet. By the richness of
their crops, the people here ought to be among the most prosperous, but
they are so taxed by the Government, and bled by the mandarins, small
and great, that they have no chance. Wherever we went the people were
complaining of their hard lot; nor was this mere talk, for since our
return to Peking there has been a serious outbreak not far from the
part of the country that we had travelled over. The insurrection, if it
deserved the name, has been happily quelled, but not before the rioters
had done great damage, making themselves masters of two small towns;
and it was even said that they had killed the governor of one town, but
this was afterwards contradicted. The affair was merely an additional
proof of the tyranny of the petty rulers, and the hatred with which the
people regard them. “A town priest and a country mandarin” are the
types of good luck, says the proverb; for the one is the darling of the
women, the other can feather his nest handsomely.

It is very curious in this country to come upon roadside shrines just
like those one sees in the “pious Tyrol” and other Roman Catholic
countries. Those which are erected in honour of the goddess of
mercy, Kwang-Yin, with a babe in her arms, or the Queen of Heaven,
Ti̔en-Hou, are the very counterpart of the effigies of the Madonna and
Bambino. The majority of these shrines are faced by a low whitewashed
blank wall. This often is covered by an allegorical design of great
quaintness, in which the dragon plays a prominent part. The dragon
is the principle of good, and he is engaged in constant warfare with
the serpent or the tiger, who represent the principle of evil. These
battles are a common subject for the decoration of the blank walls of
shrines. Apropos of the dragon and serpent, the Chinese have a quaint
superstition. They believe that thunderstorms are created by the dragon
pursuing the tiger or serpent through the air, hurling bolts and fiery
darts at him. It is very dangerous to stand at open windows or in an
exposed place during a thunderstorm, for the serpent and tiger are very
crafty, and have cunning ways of dodging the dragon’s shots, which thus
fall on an innocent head. The tiger, who is drawn as a vicious-looking
cat, with his back up, lives to a great age; when he has attained his
thousandth birthday, he throws off his teeth and puts on a pair of
horns. The existence of such fables is not to be wondered at, for there
are old women’s tales everywhere; what is delightful here is that some
of the educated men really believe in them.

Chang-Ping-Chou was the scene of the great tragedy of 1860, the death
of the English prisoners from the effects of the barbarities of their
captors. It is a singular fact that the only one of the mandarins
connected with those murders who is still alive has been disgraced and
banished. The others have died miserably; one was executed in gaol
for contumely to the Empress, on the very day on which, expecting his
pardon, he had invited his wives and family to go to the prison and
fetch him away; another was killed, as it is said, by his own soldiers.
The retribution has been complete. The Sikh soldiers who survived the
cruelties to which they were subjected, and who gave the account of
what had happened, described Chang-Ping-Chou as a walled city as big
as Tientsing; but this is a mistake; it is a small walled city, very
prettily situated with hills on three sides of it; on the top of one of
these is a temple which the Sikhs mistook for a fort, as they easily
might. The little town looks prosperous enough, and appeared to be
doing a brisk trade in coffins (I never saw so many in any one place in
my life) and the water-tight wicker-work buckets, which are to my mind
the most ingenious production of North China.

The Shih-san-Ling, or thirteen tombs of the Ming dynasty, are about
five miles distant from Chang-Ping-Chou. It was the burial-place of
those emperors of the dynasty who reigned after the removal of the
seat of the Empire from Nanking to Peking. The first sign that we were
approaching something remarkable was a magnificent stone gateway, built
of enormous blocks of stone and standing isolated in the midst of the
plain. This gateway is the finest specimen of Chinese architecture
that I have seen. Some way beyond this is a second gateway of brick,
roofed with the imperial tiles, also very handsome, and this leads
to a large square granite building, cruciform inside, containing a
colossal marble tortoise, from whose back springs a marble tablet of
great height, bearing an inscription on both sides, the one relating
how the tombs were built by the Ming dynasty, the other how they were
restored in the reign of Chien-Lung. This building is surrounded by
four triumphal columns. Next follows an avenue of colossal figures in
marble,—grim sentries over the approach to the sepulchres. The figures
come in the following order:—Two lions sitting, two lions standing;
two chi-lings (a fabulous beast which appears once in ten thousand
years, and was last seen at the birth of Confucius. Chi-ling is the
same as kylin, which we in England misapply to designate the porcelain
and bronze lions with curly manes which are imported; these latter are
called by the Chinese shih-tszŭ; as you have a pair, I thought this
might interest you), two chi-lings sitting; two camels sitting, two
camels standing; two elephants sitting, two elephants standing; two
scaled beasts with wings and wreathed in flames sitting, two of the
same standing; two horses standing, two horses resting; two warriors
in full armour, prepared for battle, with breastplates that reminded
one of Medusa’s head, and carrying swords and maces; two warriors in
repose, their swords sheathed and their hands crossed on their breasts;
four councillors in their caps and robes of office; four chamberlains.
We passed through this mysterious assemblage, which was very terrifying
to our horses, and then had about a mile and a half to go along a
ruined stone road, with decayed stone and marble bridges, before we
got to the tombs. Each tomb is of itself a palace. The thirteen stand
in an amphitheatre of hills among groves of cypresses and persimmon
trees. The tombs are about three-quarters of a mile apart. The plain
is cultivated now, but evidently it was originally intended that the
whole place should be silent, solitary, and secluded. Nothing can be
more beautiful than the situation. As I told you once before, in this
country the fairest spots are chosen for burying the dead, and you may
suppose that the emperors of the magnificent Ming dynasty would not be
behind their people in this.

The tomb which is generally visited by strangers, and which I saw,
is that of the Emperor Yung-Lo; it is the oldest and _par excellence_
“the Great Tomb.” The Emperor Tae-Tsung, who reigned under the style
of Yung-Lo, was the third of his dynasty; he reigned during the first
quarter of the fifteenth century. It was he who moved the capital
from Nanking to Peking. Of the thirteen emperors of his dynasty who
succeeded him, twelve are buried round him; the thirteenth, who, when
Peking was taken by the rebels, committed suicide in his harem after
killing his wives and children, with the exception of one daughter, is
missing.

The Tomb-Palace is, of course, surrounded by a high red wall tiled with
yellow, the imperial colours. A broad and handsome entrance gate leads
into a large courtyard; on the right is a pavilion containing a marble
tortoise carrying a high marble slab with a commemorative inscription.
Past this court is a vast entrance hall. Two flights of steps lead up
to the hall, and between them is a slant of marble richly carved and
ornamented; I believe that this centre path is for the good spirits to
walk along. A second courtyard contains two beautiful little yellow
shrines, both empty. A triple terrace of marble, with steps and slants
as before, precedes the grand hall, a most imposing chamber. It is 81
paces long by 36 broad, and very lofty. The floor is of black marble,
the walls a dull yellow; the roof, which is fretted and painted like
cloisonné enamel with dragons and other emblems, is supported by
thirty-six huge masts of wood, smoothed but unpolished, and all of
equal size. They are marvellously handsome, and in this country (where
wood is so precious that an empty house is not safe for a night from
thieves, who will strip it of roof, doors, and windows) must have
cost something prodigious. In the centre of the hall is rather a mean
shrine in honour of “our ancestor canonised under the name of Wên.”
Every emperor passes through three names. First he has his own name,
which, after he ascends the throne, is never used nor borne again, for
he then assumes the style of his reign, and at his death is canonised
under a third. So this Emperor’s name was Tai-Tsung; he reigned under
the style of Yung-Lo, and was finally canonised as Wên. After this
grand hall come two more courtyards; in one of these stands a great
sacrificial altar of stone and marble. The top block of marble is eight
paces long; on this altar are placed the five gifts—an incense-burner,
two candlesticks, and two pots of fruits. Inside the altar is a tank of
fresh water, which is got at by passing a stick with a piece of linen
attached to it as a sponge through a hole in the side. This water is
a specific for certain complaints. The last building is a high tower,
with a vaulted passage springing off into two directions. I never heard
such an echo as this produced; we two, as we walked along, made a noise
like that of a regiment. From the top of the tower, which contains a
large perpendicular slab of marble painted red, there is a beautiful
view over the country, with the thirteen palaces of the dead each in
its niche in the hills; it is really a scene of rare and striking
beauty. Just behind the tower is an artificial mound covered with trees
and verdure; this, I believe, is where the body lies—a few old bones to
all this magnificence. There is a Chinese proverb which says, “Better
be a living beggar covered with sores than a dead emperor.”

As we were sitting over our dinner at the inn we both agreed that as
it was a lovely moonlight night we would go back at any rate as far
as the avenue of colossal statues. I never saw anything so weird as
the big beasts and warriors looked; they almost seemed to move in the
moonlight—one half expected one of them to come down from his pedestal,
like the Commendatore in _Don Giovanni_, and punish us for the
intrusion. It is impossible to imagine a wilder or more lonely spot; it
is really the solitude of the tomb.

The next morning at daybreak we rode into Peking, about 25 miles. I
have seen nothing so interesting since I have been in China as the
scenes of which I have tried to give you an idea.




                               LETTER XV


                                        PEKING, _25th October 1865_.

I who so lately wrote to you about blazing sun and scorching heat am
now glad to nestle into the chimney-corner and watch the “pictures in
the fire.” Outside, the rain is falling fitfully and the wind blowing
a hurricane; it moans and howls dismally through the courts and cranky
buildings of the Legation, piercing its way into all sorts of odd
nooks, and routing out old bells that jangle in a harsh and discordant
way from the quaint eaves, as if they were angry at being disturbed
in their dusty dens. Doors are creaking and timbers groaning in every
direction, and the windows threaten to burst in, but the stout Corean
paper holds good, though it gets stretched and flaps unpleasantly like
loose sails in a calm, and on the whole I confess I prefer glass. Every
now and then, as the storm abates for a while, I hear the tap, tap,
tap, of the watchman’s bamboo as he goes his rounds, and can’t help
grunting with Lucretian satisfaction as I look at my fire and think of
how cold he must be. In short, we are working gradually into winter. In
another fortnight the trees will all be bare, and Peking, throwing off
the green clothes which it puts on in summer, in order to delude stray
visitors into the idea that it is a pretty place, will stand naked,
dirty, and ashamed. The last month has been very pleasant—neither too
hot nor too cold; and the early morning rides, before wind or dust has
arisen, and when the evil smells of the town, which are beaten down by
the night dews, have not had time to assert themselves again, put fresh
life into us after the great heats. I have got a new horse. The first
one which I bought in the spring turned out to be possessed of every
vice to which horse-flesh is heir; so I sold him at a loss, after he
had bored my life out for four months, and am now well mounted on a
first-rate Mongol cob.

Talking of horses leads me to dogs. I have had a sad loss in my little
dog Nou-nou, of whom I was very fond. I told you what a little Turk he
was, always getting himself into scrapes about his amours. Well, the
other day he had some words with a big dog belonging to the sergeant of
our escort, which ended in his getting a bite in the back that broke
his spine and killed him. Everybody in the Legation regrets him, poor
little beast; he had been at Peking ever since the foreign Legations
first came here, and was quite a character about the place. I was very
much grieved at his death.

We have been interested lately in the steps taken by the Russian
Government to establish a telegraph from Kiachta to Peking and
Tientsing. The Russians wish that it should be a Chinese enterprise,
but that they, the Russians, should set it up and help in working
it. Accordingly, they have sent an officer of engineers here with a
complete apparatus to show the Chinese Government. It is set up in
the gardens of the Russian Legation. Some four years ago, when Baron
Gros returned to Europe, he sent out to the Prince of Kung a present
of an electric telegraphic apparatus. Such was the horror which the
Chinese then had of innovations, that the Prince not only refused to
accept it, but even to see it. Now, however, the Government is more
ripe for taking impressions from abroad. The members of the Foreign
Office, and afterwards the Prince, have been to see the machine work,
although the Prince took good care not to allow that his visit had any
special purpose, and with that view went the round of all the Legations
the same day. He watched the working of the telegraph without showing
any great astonishment or perception of what was going on; but a few
days afterwards M. Vlangaly, the Russian Minister, who had drawn up
for the Prince a paper upon the subject of the international utility
of telegraphs, received a very satisfactory despatch from the Foreign
Office to the effect that one visit was not enough to enable the
Ministers to appreciate so wonderful an invention, and that they hoped
to be allowed to see it again. M. Vlangaly has had the happy idea of
having some intelligent Chinese lads taught to work the telegraph, so
next time the Prince comes he will see that his own people can learn to
send off and take down messages. This is all a great step in advance.
The French, who are always on the look-out to find that other Powers
are extending their “influence,” as they call it, and in this case
have the additional motive for jealousy in the refusal of Baron Gros’
present, look upon this move of the Russians with great distrust and
dislike. We, on the contrary, are all for supporting any Power who will
help the Chinese to move forwards. The superstitions of the people
would be a great difficulty in the way of carrying out telegraphs,
railroads, or any great engineering project in China. They would view
with the utmost horror anything which might disturb places deemed
sacred, lucky, or unlucky. They have a regular system for determining
propitious places, manners of building, and the like. This they call
“Fêng Shui,” the wind and water system, and it is universally believed
in. No Chinaman, however educated, would inhabit a new house without
ascertaining that it fulfilled all the requirements laid down in the
books which treat of “Fêng Shui.” Some time ago one of our men was
ill; our chief teacher, a man of great learning as Chinamen go, said
quietly to Wade that it must be owing to a new chimney which had been
built opposite to the sick man’s room, but about a hundred and fifty
yards off. Any work which might be undertaken here must be carried out
with all respect to the “Fêng Shui,” or it would run the risk of being
destroyed. Graves and other sacred places must also not be interfered
with. In carrying any engineering project into execution, the best
plan would be for the engineer to lay down his line and employ Chinese
experts in such matters to see how nearly it could be followed.

I have rather a good story to tell you. One of our subjects of
complaint at the Chinese Foreign Office has been our being insulted
in the streets of Peking by the riffraff of the place. Their means of
annoyance is to howl out “Kwei-tzŭ” (devils) after us when our backs
are turned, and then, of course, to look as if they had not done it.
Well, the other day M. de Mas, the Spanish Minister, being about to
leave Peking, exchanged compliments p.p.c. with all the members of the
Foreign Board. Amongst them all Hêng-Chi distinguished himself by his
_empressement_, sending M. de Mas a magnificent dinner _à la Chinoise_.
M. de Mas went to thank him, and after the two old gentlemen had
exchanged banalities to their hearts’ content, the Spaniard knowing
that Hêng-Chi had a little son, the child of his old age, of whom he
was inordinately proud, thought it would be a very pretty compliment if
he asked to see the little boy, who was accordingly produced, sucking
his thumb after the manner of his years. Him his father ordered to
pay his respects to M. de Mas—that is to say, shake his united fists
at him in token of salutation, instead of which the child, after long
silence and much urging, taking his thumb deliberately out of his
mouth, roared out “Kwei-tzŭ” at the top of his voice and fled. Imagine
the consternation of the two old twaddles! Hêng-Chi was horrified, for
after all his protestations of friendship to us, which by the bye took
nobody in, it bored him not a little that we should find out that his
child was brought up in the privacy of his harem to look upon us as
devils.

A French missionary has been murdered in the province of Ssŭ-Chuan,
in the extreme west. It is said that there are 800,000 Christians in
the province. There have been persecutions and disturbances on their
account of late, and the Government of Peking will have to take very
active steps in the matter, or the French will be down upon them. The
central Government are always slow in punishing their provincial
authorities, whom they fear; and in this instance they will be the more
reluctant, as the governor of the province is a man who has done them
good service as an administrator.

We hear rumours of reforms in China. If the present dynasty is to be
preserved and China to remain independent, they must be brought about
quickly, for the moment is critical. Nothing can be more rotten and
corrupt than every branch of the administration, nothing can be more
faithless than the conduct of the Chinese towards foreigners. With
misery and discontent at home, and angry reclamations for breaches of
treaty from abroad, the Government are beginning to tremble for their
existence. If the remedy does not come soon it will be too late.




                               LETTER XVI


                                        PEKING, _5th November 1865_.

I was awakened this morning by such a noise of squibs, crackers,
petards, maroons, bombs, cannon, and all manner of fireworks, that I
rubbed my eyes and was half inclined to fancy that some good fairy
had transported me back to England, where Guy Fawkes’ day was being
celebrated on a scale of unprecedented splendour. Not, however, that
fireworks are a matter of astonishment here—they are going on at all
hours of the day and night; our opposite neighbour, the Prince of Su,
is continually letting off pieces which, to judge from the noise they
make, would make the bouquet at Cremorne look very foolish. Fireworks
and sweetmeats are the favourite dissipation of the Pekingese; the
ladies especially take great delight in them, burning and sucking away
immense sums. To-day Peking out-heroded itself: never was heard such
a fizzing, cracking, popping, and banging; for this is the seventeenth
day of the ninth moon, and although the Gunpowder Plot was never heard
of here, and if it had been would not have produced any extraordinary
sensation, still it is an occasion upon which every devout and proper
Chinaman is bound to burn as many squibs as he can afford, or more;
for the seventeenth day of the ninth moon is the birthday of a certain
little pousa or god, by name Tsai-shên. Now this little god is a
very great little god, being intimately connected with tradespeople,
and especially with their profits; and as tradespeople here are very
numerous, and all have a natural weakness for profits, a great many
crackers and squibs are expended to do this little god honour and
service—of course _à titre de revanche_; moreover, scraps of paper
upon which are written or printed characters of good omen are burnt
and scattered to the winds. Furthermore, this little god having been
during his lifetime on earth connected with the Mohammedan religion,
it is also a matter of decency to eat and invite him to eat mutton
all day, for pork would evidently be an insult to him, while beef
would be a deep personal affront to Buddha, but mutton satisfies all
parties, including the eaters, provided that they have enough of it. I
have mentioned this because it seemed to me noteworthy that at the two
ends of our hemisphere the same day should this year be from different
causes celebrated somewhat in the same way.

The little Emperor leaves Peking to-day for the Tung-Ling, the tombs of
the emperors of this dynasty. He goes to place his father’s coffin in
the tomb which has been prepared for it, and which has taken four years
to build. It is a great state occasion. The Emperor will be accompanied
by the Prince of Kung, and all the court and chief ministers, with
the exception of Wen Hsiang, who is the real Minister for Foreign
Affairs. He remains to take charge of the capital. I shall be able
to tell you nothing about the procession, for on these occasions the
members of the Legations receive an official notification not to show
themselves in certain streets between certain hours. Indeed, the whole
thing is conducted within the city with as much secrecy and mystery as
the Princess Badroulbadour’s procession to the bath in the _Arabian
Nights_; shops are closed and shutters put up, and the streets are
cleared along the line of march, for there is no saying what harm might
happen to the state if a citizen of Peking were to catch a glimpse of
the outside of the chair in which his Emperor is being carried. The
consistency of the Chinese in this as in other matters is remarkable,
for once the cavalcade is outside the city walls any lout may go
and gape at it. The public gains one advantage from these Imperial
progresses. The roads over which His Majesty is to pass are repaired,
for it would never do for Imperial bones to be shaken and Imperial
eyes offended by such roads as are good enough for “the hundred names”
(which is the Chinese expression for the common people).

The Chinese-Mesopotamian treaty was signed on the 2nd instant, and
I must say that the Chinese come uncommonly well out of the affair.
They had already concluded a treaty with Mesopotamia at Shanghai,
and had received no notification that the King of that country had
refused to ratify it, when all of a sudden a gentleman appeared this
summer announcing himself as plenipotentiary sent by the King to
conclude a treaty, nothing being said of the former one. The Chinese,
after some discussion, named two plenipotentiaries, and offered M.
T—— his choice of any existing treaty. He, however, said, “A quoi bon
envoyer un négociateur s’il ne doit pas négocier,” and sat down to
compose a treaty on the principle of an amateur opera, out of four
others. However, as the history of the treaty would not amuse you,
it is enough to say that the Mesopotamian showed himself to be _plus
Chinois que les Chinois_, while the Chinese exhibited a pliability and
a willingness to accept innovations which took us all by surprise. The
treaty is an affair of very small consideration; there has occasionally
been a Mesopotamian ship seen in the Chinese seas, and there is one
Mesopotamian subject in China who was declared bankrupt during the
negotiations. But the conduct of the Chinese, as showing a desire to
amend in their foreign policy, is of the last importance to us. They
have shown in these negotiations that they have read their translation
of Wheaton’s _International Law_ with profit, and they have departed
from old precedents in a way which was enough to make the old
conservatives’ tails stand on end.

The great difficulty with the Chinese has been their foreign policy.
Their internal affairs would right themselves if they would accept our
civilisation and our standard of official probity. But if they are to
preserve their independence they must learn to keep faith with foreign
nations and meet honesty with honesty.

Although in our recent dealings with the Chinese they have shown
better faith and more loyalty than before, we have still many crows to
pick with them. Breaches of treaty are endless. One of the articles
upon which we insist the most is that which provides that a British
subject offending against the Chinese law shall be handed over for
punishment to the nearest consul. The Taeping rebellion has attracted
to its ranks a vast number of rowdies, many of them deserters from the
Imperialist army. If these men were caught and left to the mercy of the
native authorities, it is fearful to think what their fate would be.
We are at this moment trying to rescue one man from their clutches,
and investigating the case of another whom they reported to have died
a natural death while being taken to Shanghai; but as the report was
not made until six weeks after his death, we suspect treachery. The
central Government shows every disposition to help us, but governors of
provinces are strong, and they know it. No stone, of course, will be
left unturned to get back the living man (if indeed he be still alive),
nor to exact retribution for the death of the other, if there should be
proved to have been foul play. It is not yet all rose-colour, you see.


                                                    _13th November._

We have no news yet of the mail of 10th September, which brings out
our new chief, Sir Rutherford Alcock. I was to have gone to Tientsing
to meet him, but I fancied the river journey would be rather cold;
and I am very glad I did not go, as I should have been dangling about
Tientsing all these days, not knowing what to do with myself. In the
meanwhile we are busy preparing for his reception. I am already in my
new house, which is rather pretty, with a great deal of Chinese carved
woodwork, but eminently adapted for catching rheumatism. It will cost
me something to make it wind-tight. I hope, however, by degrees to make
it comfortable and cosy.

I am in a state of philological orphanage. My first teacher, Ku, left
me to go into some small office—office, however small, being dear to
every Chinaman; my second, a most charming person, was caught stealing
a dollar off my table. The man was really such a pleasant companion
and such a good master that I rather wished to ignore the whole
thing; but my servant Chang-Hsi represented that if Hsü Hsien Shêng
remained he could be responsible for nothing that was lost, and so I
had to pack off poor Hsü. He was a perfectly inexhaustible fund of
anecdotes, proverbs, folk-lore, and Chinese small talk, so different
from the ordinary run of Chinese teachers, whose only idea of broaching
a conversation is to ask some preposterous question about one’s
“honourable country.” If he could but have kept his hands from picking
and stealing!




                              LETTER XVII


                                       PEKING, _25th November 1865_.

We are sending off a mail to-day in the hopes that it will yet be able
to leave Tientsing for Shanghai before we are finally shut out by the
frost from communication with the outer world. After this our posts
will be rare and uncertain, going by land to Chihfu and thence on.
The winter has well set in; we have had several sharp frosts, which,
although they are child’s play to what I have seen in Russia, are
aggravated by cutting winds which blow clouds of dust, pricking one’s
face like flights of needles. Nothing can be more bare and desolate
than this city, now that it is stripped of its leaves. Everything looks
gray and black, and the Chinese houses have a poor, pinched appearance
that to English eyes, accustomed to see a cheerful fire blazing in
even the poorest cottages, is very shivery. The natives are already
swaddled up in furs and wadding, and commend me to a cold Chinaman for
looking wretched. Their yellow-brown faces get perfectly livid and
corpse-like under the effect of the cold winds, a great contrast to the
tanned and sturdy Mongols who are beginning to flock into the city.
The life in the streets is changed too by the innumerable droves of
Bactrian camels with double humps that are pouring in long streams of
merchandise.

One great advantage of this time of year is in the improvement of our
larder. In summer we are obliged to ring the changes on tough beef and
stringy mutton; now we have plenty of game—hares, several sorts of
pheasants, wild duck, teal, snipes, and other birds innumerable. Soon
we shall have varieties of venison, amongst them that of an antelope of
Mongolia which the Chinese call Hwang-Yang, “yellow sheep,” said to be
the daintiest venison in the world. Of fruit we have plenty; there is a
certain small apple-shaped pear, by far the best I ever tasted. Grapes
we have every day in the year, so that nature does as much for us as
Mr. S——’s gardener does for him. To be sure, the gardener beats nature
hollow as to quality.

The _Peking Gazette_ has just announced an appointment in the Chinese
Foreign Office (the Tsung-Li Yamên), which is said to be the most
important event, as far as foreign relations are concerned, that has
taken place since the signature of Lord Elgin’s treaty. A mandarin
of the name of Hsü has been named one of the high Ministers of the
Office. This man some years ago was in high office in the province
of Fohkien, and while there, he, with the help of certain American
missionaries, wrote a work on the geography of the world, in which
he examined foreign institutions and men with an interest which no
Chinaman had ever before shown. His two favourite heroes were Napoleon
and Washington. The book was written in a popular form, and had a large
sale. After he had been in office three years he came to Peking to
pay his respects to the Emperor, and during his visit was degraded on
the plea that he had not conducted his government well, but really on
account of the new views put forward in his book, and of his admiration
and intelligence of foreign affairs. Now, for the very qualities
which before brought him into disgrace, he is raised to the dignity
of a red button of the third rank, and appointed to a vacancy in the
Board of Foreign Ministers, which was made this spring by the dismissal
of a mandarin named Hsüeh, who was degraded on account of his being
suspected of attempts to bribe the Prince of Kung at the same time
that His Imperial Highness was also out of favour. Hsü’s acceptance of
office is looked upon as the beginning of a new era in our intercourse
with the Chinese.

Sir Rutherford Alcock has reached Tientsing after a series of
disasters. He came in a man-of-war from Shanghai, disdaining the
regular steamers, and the consequence is that everything has gone
wrong, the last mishap being the loss of the Legation treasure outside
the bar at Taku, with 18,000 dollars. The sailors managed to upset
the chest into the sea as they were transhipping it into the little
steamer which was to bring it up the Peiho. There is a rumour that
divers have recovered the chest; if it is true, I think they deserve
all its contents for their pains. The weather is not exactly suited for
diving. Meanwhile the Legation courtyards are being flooded with carts
and packing-cases containing furniture, pianos, harmoniums, and games
of croquet; the latter will be hard to use, for there is not a blade of
grass nearer than the park round the Temple of Heaven.




                              LETTER XVIII


                                        PEKING, _4th December 1865_.

The messenger who brought us in the welcome mail of the 26th September
also told us that there was still a chance of catching a vessel at
Taku, before the final freezing of the Gulf of Pechili—the river, of
course, is long since closed—so here goes for the last account of us
before we are shut up.

Sir Rutherford Alcock arrived here last Wednesday with his family.
They had a terrible journey of it; three days from Tientsing in sedan
chairs, sleeping in inns without fires, and only paper windows in
different degrees of bad repair.

We are enjoying the _beau idéal_ of winter weather. We have had one
fall of snow, which has left its traces in the shade and on the north
side of the house-roofs; everywhere else it has disappeared under a sun
which at mid-day is always genial; the sharp frosts of the night and
early morning keep the ground as hard as iron; the air is perfectly
delicious, and for many days we have not been visited by our chief
curse, the wind, which comes tearing down from Mongolia to choke and
blind us with dust. This weather, fine as it is, comes very hard on the
beggars, who go about stark naked, livid with cold. The filth of the
furs which the poorer Chinese wear surpasses belief. It is a common
sight to see the sunny side of a wall occupied by half a dozen of the
natives who have deliberately stripped themselves and are eagerly
hunting after the vermin with which they swarm. The principal streets
are crowded with sellers of cast-off clothes, rags that would be
rejected by a respectable paper factory. They toss these about, singing
a sort of monotonous rhythmical chant all the time, after the manner of
Chinese hucksters, and they do a thriving trade in filth.

We had an offer the other day of purchasing a plant that would make a
man immortal if he ate it; as we had no desire any of us to undergo
the fate of Tithonus at the price of 5000 taels, nearly £2000, we let
it slip through our hands. It was brought to us by a drug merchant,
who said that he had found it in the mountains of Manchuria, and he
produced a Chinese botanical work in support of his statements. The
plant was a small black toad-stool; he called it the “tree of life,”
and said that it was only found once in a thousand years. We asked him
why he did not sell his treasure to the Emperor; he replied that he
would do so were it not for the way in which he would be bled by the
palace officials. When, however, we asked where the last man who had
eaten of the tree of life was to be heard of, he left in high disgust
at our unbelief. The Chinese ideas of natural history are always very
curious. Some days ago one of the wandering curio-sellers came to me
with a beautiful little crystal snuff-bottle of what they call hair
crystal, from the black veins like hair which run through it, and he
thought it necessary to explain how the hair got into the crystal. “You
see,” said he, “as your Excellency knows, we Chinese did not always
shave our heads as we do now. In the time of the Ming dynasty our
people used to wear their hair long, but when the Tartars usurped the
throne our people were all forced to shave their heads. Accordingly
they threw their hair which they had cut off into the sea. There the
waves and the rays of the sun, combining their influences, acted upon
this hair and produced the effect which your Excellency admires. But it
was only in rare instances that the influences happened to coincide,
and no man could of his own will, and by cutting off his hair, depend
on its being turned into hair crystal.”

The Emperor’s journey to bury his father has been made the opportunity
of rescinding all the decrees disgracing the Prince of Kung last
spring. They are to be blotted out from the records of the Empire, so
that future ages may know nothing about them.




                               LETTER XIX


                                         PEKING, _1st January 1866_.

The arrival of the mail last night brought the old year to a happy
termination, but, alas! Saurin is to leave us for a German post. My
batch of letters was doubly welcome, it was so long since I had heard
from home, and may be such an age before another mail comes up from
Chefoo; as for the newspapers, they bring such stale news now that they
are hardly worth plodding through. We get the pith of the news by the
Russian post and telegraph to Kiachta, so reading the _Times_ is like
being gifted in a small way with the power of prophecy, and shows what
a very tame affair life would be if we could foresee the future. Our
papers are still speculating on Lord Palmerston’s actions next session,
and three weeks ago we heard the news of his death.

This morning I was awakened by a procession of all the Chinamen about
the Legation, who came to bend the knee before me and wish me joy for
the New Year. I hope all their good wishes, with mine into the bargain,
may be realised for You.

Although it is a long time since I last wrote to you, I have little
enough to say. Sir Rutherford and Lady Alcock have settled down in
their new quarters. I think they are rather disappointed, and no
wonder; but they seem determined to make the best of everything, and to
try and make every one comfortable about them. Sir Rutherford’s first
interview with the Prince of Kung passed off very well. I never saw the
Prince so gracious. The Chinese Foreign Office, the Tsung-Li Yamên, is
almost as bad a place for receiving in as our old building in Downing
Street.[9] In order to be met at the great gates, which on grand
occasions is _de rigueur_, we have to pass into the reception-room
through the back kitchen, where we see all the little dainties which
we are to eat being cooked by very dirty natives. The reception-room
is a sort of octagonal glass pavilion in the middle of the courtyard,
a wretchedly cold place. However, the Chinese are independent of cold
rooms, for they don’t take off their furs (the fur of foxes’ legs is
the official dress), and they wear boots so thick that they cannot feel
the cold stones of the floor. Of course a building so exposed is as hot
in summer as it is cold in winter, so in this climate of extremes a
visit to the Chinese Foreign Office is never very pleasant.

I should tell you that the Tsung-Li Yamên is really a board of high
officials, all of whom hold other functions, which was created after
the treaties of 1860 for the conduct of foreign affairs. There is no
titular Foreign Minister.

One bright cold morning, about a fortnight ago, three of us witnessed
a Chinese execution. The place of execution is at the opening of the
vegetable market in the Chinese city. The market is held in a broadish
street, into which a number of large thoroughfares, at right angles
to it, lead. All these inlets were fenced off, and the street itself
filled with soldiery and officials; such a tatterdemalion crowd! with
nothing resembling uniformity of dress except the Tartar cap, and
that, in many cases, was torn and battered, and tassel-less. The men
were as heterogeneous as their clothes. Old and young, strong and
decrepit, half blind or whole deaf, none seemed too miserable objects
for service. I saw one effective soldier on crutches; hunchbacks and
cripples were in plenty. We left our horses in charge of some of these
poor devils, and walked through the lines, no one opposing us, but,
on the contrary, every one showing us the utmost civility. The whole
of the shops in the street were closed, but the flat, low roofs were
crowded with spectators; among them not a single woman or child was to
be seen.

At one end of the space closed off was a matting shed. Inside this
were the condemned prisoners, who were waiting for the Imperial decree
for their death to be brought on to the ground. We went in, and I
shall not easily forget the scene. There were fifteen criminals, of
whom one was a woman, one was a murderer; two, of whom the woman was
one, had stolen girls and sold them into the worst of all slavery;
the rest were highway robbers. The murderer was to be decapitated, it
being a severe punishment to a Chinese not to take his body out of the
world as his parents gave it to him. (It is this feeling that makes
them so averse to amputation.) The others were all to be strangled.
It is very strange to be talking with men who are to die within a few
minutes. Some of them were perfectly calm and collected, and came up
to talk with us and ask us questions, as if nothing was the matter.
One bright, intelligent-looking fellow came up to me and said, “Well,
I suppose you’ve come to see the fun.” The word he used was the same
that would be employed to signify the fun of a fair. “Do you have
this sort of fun in your country?” another said laughingly. “I wish
you would take me off with you.” We said we should only be too glad;
on which he smiled and said, “Ah! the law won’t let you do that.”
One very old man could not forget his Asiatic politeness, even _in
articulo mortis_. One of our party had asked a guard for a light for
his cigar. The guard either did not hear or did not pay attention; on
which the old fellow touched him and said, “What manners are these?
don’t you see the gentleman wants a light.” All, however, were not
so quiet. The murderer was raving and ranting drunk, howling out
every obscene blasphemy that he could think of against the Emperor.
The woman had been charitably given some drug, which, though it had
made her very sick, had deprived her of consciousness. Nothing could
exceed the kindness of the officials, one and all, to the condemned
men. They were giving them smokes out of their pipes, tea, and wine;
even the wretched murderer, who was struggling and fighting between
two soldiers, was only asked to “be quiet, be quiet,” in spite of all
provocation. The others were walking about the booth, their hands tied,
and a sort of arrow stuck behind their backs, bearing their name and
the crime for which they were to suffer, but otherwise uncontrolled.
They were all from one part of the country. I told you that the woman
had been drugged. This is a constant practice at executions. The most
famous drug for this purpose is the blood from under the red crest of
the crane, called by the Chinese “Ho ting hung.” This, or a medicine
purporting to be such, is sold at an immense price, and is said to be
carried by mandarins in one of the beads of their necklaces, in order
that if they incur the Emperor’s displeasure, they may have the means
of death at hand, for the crane’s crest-blood is a poison as well as
an anodyne. We gave all the cigars we had with us to the poor condemned
criminals, who were very grateful for them, and I was glad to leave so
painful a scene. A little farther down the street another large booth
had been erected. Here sat the high officials in a semicircle, with a
red-button mandarin from the Board of Punishments at their head. On one
side of this booth was a tiny sort of altar on which were displayed
the tools of the executioner—the swords and bloody string, and the
tourniquets and strings for strangling. In front of the altar a small
brick stove had been built, over which was a caldron of boiling water,
like a huge barber’s pot, to warm the swords. The executioner’s men
were huddled round it toasting their hands. The swords are short broad
blades, almost like choppers, with a long wooden handle on which is
carved a grotesque head. They have been above two hundred years in
use, and are regarded as genii and invested with preternatural powers.
They are five in number, and their names are Great Lord, second Lord,
third Lord, fourth Lord, and fifth Lord (Ta yeh, êrh yeh, san yeh, ssŭ
yeh, and wu yeh). When they are not in use they are kept at the chief
executioner’s house, a tower on the wall, where, as my teacher gravely
informed me, they are often heard at night to sing gruesome songs of
their past feats. When they are wanted their Lordships are “requested”
to come out.

The executioners have all sorts of stories and traditions about them.
One is supposed to be younger than the others, and of a skittish,
frolicsome nature, dallying and toying with the heads, not striking
them off at one blow like the others, who are older and more sedate.
There were many false alarms that the decree had come and announced the
fatal moment. But at last the chief headsman (Kwei-tzŭ-shou) came out,
and throwing off his fur coat put on a bloodstained apron of yellow
leather. He was a short, thick-set, but not ill-looking man, with that
curious, anxious, _waiting_ expression on his face that a man wears
with serious work before him. It was horrid to see how completely he
was the hero of the occasion, the soldiers round him treating him with
the greatest deference, and evidently proud of a word from him. The
five swords were carried in line near him. His assistant stripped his
outer coat, and then all was ready. So soon as the decree arrived the
prisoners were led out one by one to the booth where the mandarins
were sitting, and there made to go through the form of acknowledging
the justice of their punishment. They were then handed over to the
executioner. The headsman and his men had to beat back the other
soldiers with sticks in order to clear a space. Nothing could be more
indecent and revolting than the behaviour of the latter. All order and
discipline were at an end; they were like hounds yelling, snarling, and
struggling to tear a fox in pieces rather than men ostensibly employed
to keep the peace. The murderer was the first man brought forward.
Happily he had raved himself into a state of insensibility, so his
pains were over. The decapitation is done with marvellous speed. A
string is passed round the prisoner’s neck, close under the chin, and
his head is thus held up by the assistant so as to offer resistance
to the sword. When a mandarin is executed, the headsman meets him and
says, “Ching ta jên kwei ti̔en,” “I pray that your Excellency may fly
to heaven”—much as our executioners used to ask the pardon of their
victims. The man is made to kneel, in an instant the sword is raised,
the executioner gives a shriek supposed to represent the words “I have
executed a man” (Sha liao jên), and at one blow the head is severed
from the trunk and carried off to be inspected by the mandarins. As
the blow falls the people all cry out, “A good sword” (hao Tao),
partly in praise of the headsman’s skill, but more especially from a
superstitious feeling _um berufen_. The strangling is done with the
same merciful quickness. It is far less lengthy than hanging. Two
pieces of whip-cord are passed round the neck with a loop. The criminal
is placed with his face to the ground, and the two executioners turn
the tourniquet as quick as thought. Apparently there is no suffering.
As I passed the big booth on my way out—for you may imagine that when
I had seen how the matter was conducted I stayed for no more—I heard
a loud voice shout out a name. Immediately out of the shed where the
rest of the condemned were waiting, I saw a tall man walk out between
two others as leisurely and composedly as if he had been going to his
dinner. It was one of the young fellows with whom I had spoken so short
a time before. The last act of this horror is consummated in the _Pit
of the 10,000_ (Wan Jên K’êng) by the wolves and foxes, a pit in the
Chinese city where the bodies of executed criminals are thrown. Rich
people’s bodies are bought back by their families that they may receive
decent burial.

I was glad to see that the execution was conducted far more mercifully
than one is led to suppose by certain writers. It is true that this is
not the “Ling Chih,” or disgraceful slow death, which is the punishment
of parricide[10] and high treason. But an Englishman who has witnessed
that assures me that the criminal he saw so executed was put out of his
misery at once, and that the mutilation took place _after_ death and
not before. I was specially struck by the excessive kindness of the
soldiery to the criminals. The only sign of cruel disposition was the
eagerness with which they pressed forward to see the death. That was
revolting.

Of all the men who died that day not one appeared to be in the
slightest degree affected by the solemnity of his position, or to show
any apprehension for what was to follow. Where there was any emotion it
was simply abject terror of the immediate pain of dying. Beyond that
their thoughts did not seem to penetrate.

I must bring this letter of horrors to an end.




                               LETTER XX


                                        PEKING, _20th January 1866_.

Since I last wrote we have all been leading the lives of vegetables
in our own garden; with a skating rink inside the Legation there is
no excuse for facing the wind and dust outside. We have the greatest
difficulty in keeping up our rink. The wind blows the dust on to
the ice in clouds, and the hot sun melts it in, so that nothing but
constant flooding will keep the ice going. This has been an unusually
dry season even for this driest of climates, so much so that a few days
ago a decree appeared in the _Peking Gazette_ directing five princes
of the blood to proceed to different temples, and offer up incense,
and pray for snow. The Emperor had a cold, or he would have gone
himself. The _Peking Gazette_, by the way, is a very curious little
publication. It appears daily in the form of a small pamphlet, and
is sold for a trifling sum. It is said to have been first published
in the time of the Sung dynasty, about seven hundred years before its
brother of London was born at Oxford. It contains the movements of the
court, Imperial decrees, petitions, memorials and the answers thereto,
appointments, promotions, rewards, etc. Some of the announcements are
very amusing. I give you one or two specimens. Some months ago, at the
storming of a town which was in the hands of the rebels, at the very
moment when a mine had been sprung, Kwan-Ti, the god of war, appeared
in all his majesty (it don’t seem quite clear who saw him), and by his
presence so encouraged the Imperialist troops that they rushed into the
breach with an ardour which carried everything before it, and sacked
the city. In gratitude for this, at the request of the high officials
of Shan Hsi, the Emperor directs the officers of the Han Lin (Imperial
college) and of the Nan Shu Fang (private Imperial library) to prepare
a tablet to be erected in some temple in Shan Hsi to commemorate the
divine interposition. Notice is sent by the authorities of Cheh Kiang
to the Board of Ceremonies and Rites that a widow in those parts,
being in uncontrollable grief for her husband’s death, and resolved
to preserve her fidelity to him, has committed suicide. Posthumous
honours are awarded to her for her great chastity. (To commit suicide
on the death of her husband is the highest virtue which a Chinese wife
can show. The streets of Peking are in many places crossed by wooden
triumphal arches called Pai Lo in honour of these chaste matrons. It
would seem, however, rather as if this extreme chastity were dying
out, for I don’t know one of these arches that is not in the last
stage of decay.) A taotai, governor of a city from down south, has
come up to Peking on business connected with the sulphur trade. Having
finished what he had to do, he reminds the Government that his father
was killed some years ago in the rebellion in Shan Hsi, and his body
never recovered. He represents that the old gentleman’s bones weigh
heavily upon him and make him feel very uncomfortable, and he suggests
that the Government might send him on a special mission to Shan Hsi to
try and recover these same bones, paying his expenses as a matter of
course. The Government, in reply to this, praise his filial piety,
enter into his views about the bones with enthusiasm, encourage him by
all means to try and find them, but positively decline to open their
purse-strings. Posthumous honours, canonisation, or deification, are
often recorded in the _Gazette_.

Old Hêng-Chi is the officer of the Tsung-Li Yamên charged with
negotiating a new commercial treaty with the Russians relative to the
Siberian and Mongolian trade. Whenever he is going to be particularly
obstructive he sends po-po (sweetmeats) to the Legation. Now I suppose
he is going to play the Russians some _tour pendable_, for he sent a
whole feast both to the minister and secretary of Legation. It was
very prettily arranged; the decoration of the dishes and piling of the
sweetmeats in patterns must have cost the cook a world of trouble. I
think I once before gave you an account of a Chinese feast given by the
same old gentleman, and I daresay you don’t wish a repetition of the
account any more than I do of the feast, though the things are not bad
once in a way. The bird’s-nest soup was very good, though it owes its
flavour to the condiments with which it is dressed, the nest itself
being as tasteless as isinglass, which it much resembles.

My teacher the other day gave me some original views as to the
outbreak of cholera which took place a few years ago. Various causes
were assigned for it. Some said that the epidemic was caused by the
exhalations from the dead bodies of those who were killed in the Ta̔i
Pi̔ng rebellion; others, that offence had been given to Wên Shên, the
spirit of pestilence, a deity who is represented with a blue face and
red hair and beard. He carries in his hand a disk, a spear, a sword,
or some warlike weapon. A man who has fallen into misfortune is said
to have met Wên Shên. To be “as ugly as the Lord Wên Shên” is what we
should translate by “to be as ugly as sin.”

We had rather a good piece of fun the other night. One of our ladies
of the _Corps diplomatique_ has started Thursday “at homes,” and all
the Europeans in Peking congregate there. Last Thursday some one or
other sat down and played a valse, upon which a tarantula bit the only
two ladies, and they declared they must and would dance, so Pichon,
the French attaché, and I were told off as partners for them. Just
as we were spinning round the room, in came three or four Chinese
servants with trays of cake and hot wine, which I thought they would
have dropped, so stupefied were they at the sight. I don’t think I ever
saw astonishment so written on faces before. I can fancy them talking
about it afterwards—Ai yah! There was his Excellency Mi (that’s me) and
Pi Lao Yeh seizing the two Ku-niangs (young ladies) round the waist in
the most indecorous manner, and running round and round the room with
them, while O Lao Yeh beat the harp-table. Indeed it was unsurpassable!
Strange people these barbarians!

Saurin and I had a visit from Mr. Thomas the day before yesterday.
He is famous in China as the converse of St. Matthew, having left
the Church to go to the Customs. Mr. Thomas is a linguist of some
pretensions. He speaks several European languages (including Russian),
Chinese, Japanese, and Mongol. He came out about two years ago as a
member of one of the Missionary Societies, but quarrelled with his
brother missionaries because he had the good sense to refuse to preach
in Chinese after being three months in the country. He then entered
the Chinese Customs service, and was stationed at Chihfu when I passed
by there in May last. However, he has now returned to the flock, and
is living with the other missionaries at Peking. Mr. Thomas has just
returned from a trip to Corea, which he undertook for purposes of
linguistic research, and we were greatly in hopes of hearing something
about that _terra incognita_. While Mr. Thomas was at Chihfu he was
able to be civil to two Corean merchants who had gone there to collect
debts. They were Christians, and brought open letters with them from
the Roman Catholic mission at Saoul, the capital of Corea, entreating
any Christians whom they might fall in with to treat them kindly. Mr.
Thomas took them to live with him, and commenced studying Corean under
their auspices. When they were about to return to their own country
Mr. Thomas accompanied them. He appears, however, to have seen little
or nothing. His landings were but for short walks, principally on
islands along the coast. He reached a point of the coast 25 miles from
Saoul, to which he intended to have gone in the disguise of a Corean
in mourning for his father and mother, the face completely covered by
a long veil, loose white clothes hiding the body, the costume being
completed by a hat with a brim about a yard and a half in diameter. The
wreck of his Corean junk prevented his effecting his purpose (possibly
luckily for him), and he was obliged to return to China in a Chinese
junk; so he underwent incredible hardships from hunger and dirt, and
great danger from shipwreck, to little purpose; what he acquired of
the language must have been through his two friends, and he can give
no account of the people, who must be a curious race. Not only are
they so exclusive that they forbid foreigners to enter their country,
but they prevent their own people from leaving it, as the Japanese
did; only certain privileged persons are allowed to come to China with
tribute to the Emperor or for trading purposes. There are plenty of
these in Peking at the present moment; they are distinguished by their
high hats and peculiar type; any Corean not belonging to this guild
who left his country would be decapitated on his return. It is strange
that, notwithstanding this rigid exclusiveness, the Roman Catholic
missionaries seem to live undisturbed at Saoul, where they are said to
have made many converts. They are obliged, however, to wear the Corean
mourning so as to hide their faces, and conform to the habits of the
country.[11]

The most important part of Mr. Thomas’ tale is a report that 250
Coreans have gone over the Amoor, and tendered allegiance to the
Russians. Of course Russia will have Corea sooner or later, but I think
that if this report were true we must have heard of it from other
sources.[12]




                               LETTER XXI


                                        PEKING, _3rd February 1866_.

The mail day has come round again very quickly, so I am in hopes that
you are getting letters more regularly than I had led you to expect.
If the wonderfully warm weather we are enjoying now lasts, the river
must break up soon, and then we shall have regular mails again. On the
30th of January the thermometer stood at 40° Fahrenheit at midnight.
The Chinese are in great glee; after having consumed infinite amounts
of joss-stick in praying for snow, and sent out princes of the blood
to shiver in distant temples, and all in vain, the Emperor went out
one morning to pray on his own account, and on that very morning the
snow came. We took advantage of what has turned out to be the last
of the frost, for the present at least, to make an expedition to
Yuen-Ming-Yuen and skate on the lake. It was such a bright, pretty
scene—the lake was as clear as a sheet of glass, and the ice perfectly
transparent—not very good for skating, though, for the lotus plants do
not quite lie down. However, every now and then we came upon a hundred
yards square of marvellous ice, uncut by skates and free from dust.
A number of Chinese came to look at us; figure-skating astonished
them immensely, especially anything done going backwards. Some of
the natives skate after a fashion, but they are generally contented
with tying a skate on to one foot and pushing themselves along with
the other. It is said that skating used to form part of the Manchu
bannermen’s drill. We picnicked in one of the little pavilions in the
garden, and very jolly we were.

I went a few days ago, for the first time, to visit the Russian
missionary establishment (the head of which is the Archimandrite
Palladius), in the north-east corner of the Tartar city. It is
surrounded by a large open space; the air is fresh; there is no dust,
and above all there is immediate egress into the country without having
to cross miles of filthy streets. It is such a pity that the Legations
were not established up there in 1861. The mission consists of three
priests besides the chief; there is a day-school for twenty-four
children, whose parents are all Christians; indeed, the Archimandrite
told me that the neighbouring population were almost all converts.
The Russians have altogether a large congregation here, an important
element in which are the Albazines. The Albazines were originally a
small colony of Russian labourers, who settled at the little town of
Albazin on the Amoor. In the time of Alexis, father of Peter the Great,
the Chinese made war upon this little colony, and after a desperate
resistance on their part, which lasted about two years, conquered
them and took prisoners those whom they did not kill. On account of
the great bravery which they had shown, the survivors were carried
to Peking and made to serve as soldiers. Here they have lived to the
present time, having become Chinese in everything save in the matter of
their religion, which they have faithfully preserved. From father to
son they have been forced to serve as soldiers, and allowed to select
no other career. It is only recently that a decree has been issued
emancipating them from this rule, and permitting them to follow trade,
labour, or letters. There are probably not more than ten or fifteen
pure Albazine families left; but as they have intermarried freely
with the Chinese and Christianised their women, they largely swell
the Greek congregation. The carrying off of people on both frontiers
has been an old standing quarrel between China and Russia. It was to
settle questions of this sort that Peter the Great sent an embassy
to the Emperor Ka̔ng-Hsi. This embassy was the foundation of the two
Russian missions, that of the south being the present Legation, and
that of the north the Church mission. The southern mission was used
by the merchants of the caravans which used to arrive from Siberia
once in three years, to transact business between the two countries;
it has been recently rebuilt, all except the chapel, which dates from
Peter’s time, and which still bears the marks of an earthquake which
occurred in the middle of the last century. The Archimandrite told me
that when he first came to Peking twenty-five years ago there was no
more difficulty in holding intercourse with the people than there is
at present. The priests of the mission could not go beyond the Great
Wall in one direction, nor as far as Tientsing in the other; but this
was owing to the mandarins, who always were, and probably always will
be, obstructive. The people were friendly enough; those who did not
know them, seeing strangely dressed figures with fair beards and hair
for the first time, took them for Manchu Tartars; so even now it often
happens that we Europeans are taken for Mongols by the Chinese who have
seen neither race.

I was talking the other day to my teacher about Lord Palmerston and
his wonderful strength of body and mind. He was greatly interested,
and cited two instances in Chinese history of statesmen who were
flourishing and vigorous after eighty years of age. The first case he
mentioned was that of the minister Liang, who, in the reign of the
Empress Wu-Tseih-Ti̔en of the Tang dynasty (seventh century A.D.),
obtained the highest literary degree, and became premier at the age of
eighty-two. The second case he cited was more legendary.

Wên Wang, father of Wu Wang, the first Emperor of the Chou dynasty
(and a contemporary of Saul, King of Israel), dreamt a dream, and
in his dream he saw a beast that was like a boar and yet like a man,
and it had wings and flew. Now when he awoke he was sorely troubled
in his heart, because he could not read the meaning of his dream;
so he sent for the court seer, and the court seer told him that the
interpretation of his dream was, that he should have a wise and crafty
councillor. When Wên Wang heard this, he immediately sallied forth in
his chariot to seek for this wise man, and he took with him his two
sons. After many days he came to a river called Wei-Shui-Ho, and by
the side of the river was an old man fishing. The name of this old man
was Tai Kung, and during the reign of the wicked Emperor Chou-Hsin he
had lived in a cave in a mountain, cultivating learning. When Wên Wang
saw the old man he told his sons to descend from the chariot and ask
him the road. But the old man went on with his fishing, and answered
them, saying, “Behold the little fishes have come to me, but the big
fish stops away.” Now when this oracular answer was told to Wên Wang he
immediately knew that this must be the wise man that was promised to
him in his dream, for the old man’s saying was a reproach to him that
he had not himself gone down, as manners required, but sent his sons
instead. So Wên Wang invited Tai Kung to get into his chariot, and he
carried him off and made him his chief minister. At that time Tai Kung
was eighty years old and more. When Wên Wang died Wu Wang treated Tai
Kung with the honours due to a father, for it was by his wise counsels
that the dynasty became strengthened in the kingdom. He lived to nearly
a hundred years of age, and at his death he became a spirit, and many
say that he is now the captain of all the spirits, and assigns to each
his particular place and duties.

The above is a word for word translation of the story of Tai Kung as my
teacher told it me.




                              LETTER XXII


                                        PEKING, _8th February 1866_.

I expect this will reach England with the bag that was despatched last
Saturday; at any rate it will give you a few days later news; I have
but little to say.

The student interpreters gave a second theatrical representation on
Monday. The pieces were “Our Wife” and “To Paris and back for £5.” To
my mind the most amusing part of the entertainment was to watch the
faces of the Chinese servants at the back, who, not understanding a
word, were deeply interested in the performance, and said that it was
very beautiful, especially the first piece, in which the makeshifts
for Louis XIII. dresses charmed them much. The ladies stood on an
average 5 feet 10 inches in their stockings, and had blue marks where
whiskers and beards had been shaved off in the morning; but in spite
of all drawbacks, everybody agreed that there never had been and never
could be such a success—which has always been said of every private
performance I ever witnessed.

No one could believe that we are ice-bound here. Yesterday the
thermometer at 2 P.M. stood at 84° in our courtyard; at eight in the
morning it had been down to 22°, a difference of 62°! The Chinese
complain bitterly of the heat. The Emperor was to go again to pray for
snow to-day, and the _Peking Gazette_ publishes an article from one of
the Imperial advisers, stating that the want of snow must be ascribed
to the anger of heaven on two accounts: 1st, undue severity on the part
of minor officials in the Board of Punishments; 2nd, the number of
bodies killed in the rebellion and still lying unburied.

What thieves these mandarins are! Some, time ago when the Ti̔en Wang
(Prince of Heaven), the chief of the Ta̔i Pi̔ng rebellion, poisoned
himself, his son fled carrying with him his father’s great seal, which,
on his capture, was carried to the Emperor at Peking. The seal was a
huge affair of massive gold with two dragons on the top. Its value
was about £600. When the Emperor had seen it, it was handed over to
the Prince of Kung and the Grand Council, and by them deposited under
lock and key in the council office, the watching of which by night
is confided to certain high officials. When the turn of night duty
fell to one Sa, a man of good family and a mandarin of the fourth
button, the seal was missing. There was a great hue and cry, and all
the wretched servants in the office were carried off to the Board of
Punishments, where they were tortured _secundum artem_, the real thief
Sa being quite above suspicion. Meanwhile he carried off the seal to a
goldsmith’s shop in the Chinese city, telling him that he had received
orders from the palace to have it melted down. The man undertook the
job and put the seal into the melting-pot; but the two dragons, being
harder than the rest of the metal, would not melt, so they were put
on one side to wait till a hotter fire could be prepared. As luck
would have it a friend of the goldsmith, who had heard of the loss of
the seal, came in, and seeing the two dragons, smelt a rat, and laid
an information. Sa was tried, found guilty, and strangled in the
vegetable market. He was a well-to-do man, and his family were rich
people, so the money was not needed. But a little peculation, however
small, is dear to a mandarin’s heart.

Sa was not a master of his craft; he had not sufficiently considered
the eleventh commandment,—most important to a Chinese official.




                              LETTER XXIII


                                           PEKING, _7th March 1866_.

My last letter to you was dated 8th February, on which day the
festivities of the Chinese New Year began with the feast of Tsao, the
god of the hearth. This, of course, is inaugurated with popping of
fireworks and banging of cannon. Tsao is of all the spirits the one
most intimately connected with the family, and every year, eight days
before the New Year, he goes to heaven to make his report. Now as in
every family there must always be some little secrets which it is not
desirable should be known in heaven, it is essential that something
should be done to prevent Tsao’s tongue from wagging too freely, so
offerings are made to him of barley-sugar, that his mouth may be
sticky! At the same time, upon either side of his niche, which stands
in the kitchen, are pasted posters of red paper, the one bearing the
words “Go to heaven and make a good report,” the other “Come back to
your palace and bring good luck.” The niche is then burnt, and the god
rises to heaven to come back on New Year’s Day, against which time a
new niche is prepared for him.

As the New Year approaches, the principal amusement in the streets
is flying kites. These are admirably made, and represent all manner
of birds, beasts, and fishes. There are some which even represent
centipedes, but I have not seen those. In the tail of the kite is
placed a sort of Æolian harp, such as I once told you the Chinese
attach to their pigeons. I cannot tell you what a strange effect these
weird-looking monsters humming high up in the air present. The Street
of Lanterns, too, begins to make a great show. Lamps of every variety
of shape, from a bouquet of flowers to a fiery dragon, are exposed for
sale and bought in quantities.

On New Year’s Eve the houses are cleaned up and put in order.
Characters of good omen are pasted on all the door-posts; from the
window-sills little strips of red paper stamped like lace flutter
in the wind. An altar is erected in the courtyard with candles and
offerings, while crackers and fireworks are let off all night to chase
away all the evil Spirits that have been about during the year, and
especially the Spirit of Poverty.

The 15th of February was the Chinese New Year’s Day. It was a bright,
fine day, and the people were all figged out in the best raiment
available, either from their own wardrobes or those of the pawnbrokers,
whose chests must have been emptied of every article of smart clothing
for the occasion. All the shops were shut, but not empty; for from many
of them there issued the most infernal clatter that ever stunned human
ears. I looked into one, my curiosity getting the better of my manners,
and there I saw a number of respectable middle-aged _bourgeois_ sitting
in a circle, and each with a clapper, gong, cymbals, or drum, beating
for dear life with the gravest of faces. This was exorcising devils,
and, if devils have ears, ought to be a successful plan. The streets
are full of people paying complimentary visits to their friends, a
ceremony which is nowhere so universally observed as in China. Outside
the Chien Mên, one of the gates leading from the Tartar into the
Chinese city, is a small yellow-tiled Imperial temple to Kwan-Ti, the
god of war. This is crowded with worshippers on New Year’s Day. High
and low flock to pay their respects and draw their lot for the year.
Outside the temple were a couple of priests doing a brisk trade in
tracts and joss-sticks. Armed with a bundle of the latter, which are
whisked about in flames, to the great peril of European beards, the
devout advance and perform the ko̔to̔u before the altar with three
kneelings and nine knockings of the head. They then draw nearer to
the altar, and from a sort of cup which stands upon it draw at random
a slip of bamboo with certain characters upon it. This is exchanged
according to its inscription for a piece of paper which is handed to
the votary for a few cash by an attendant priest, and which contains
his fortune for the year. The people who took part in this ceremony
were excessively devout in their demeanour; there was no symptom
of levity or indifference; they were imploring the protection of a
divine being for the coming year, with superstition if not with piety.
The richer worshippers were making offerings of pigs and sheep as
sacrifice.

I don’t recollect whether I ever mentioned to you the Liu Li Chang,
a street of booksellers and curiosity shops, and one of my favourite
lounges here. It is one of the lions of the New Year. A very amusing
fair is held there. It is perfectly thronged with people, and a very
gay scene. Toys and artificial flowers are the best things sold; some
of the former are capital. Lifelike models of insects, tiny beasts and
birds, tops, kites of all shapes, and above all some little figures
of European soldiers and sailors—caricatures of the late war—that
were irresistibly comic. One man was selling a capital toy—two little
figures, jointed, and so contrived that by pulling a horsehair which is
not seen they begin to fight and go through every motion of desperate
wrestling. There were some jugglers, but rather a low lot. One man was
having bricks smashed on his head—a somewhat alarming performance,
for which, however, he seemed none the worse. Then there was a combat
between sword and spear, after the manner of Savile House in old days,
which ended in sword getting a kick in the stomach and a poke in the
ribs, which well earned a sixpence. A peep-show represented views
taken in China and Europe, of which the exhibitor was as ignorant as
his audience: he described St. Paul’s Cathedral and the Bay of Naples
as places of repute in the Lew Chew Islands; and I really should be
ashamed to tell you what was painted on the reverse of the view of
St. Paul’s. A temple of the Chinese Æsculapius in one corner of the
fair was crowded with visitors, who were pressing round the stall of
a venerable gentleman whose stock-in-trade was a bushel or two of
teeth and a picture representing the treatment of every variety of
disease in diagrams. The teeth he had extracted were mostly sound!
Fortune-tellers were casting up chances, and wise men reading destinies
in all the courts, which were piled high with votive tablets from
grateful patients. As to the walls, the tablets on them were three
deep. The crowd were uniformly civil to us, but oh, the garlic of them!
It was high jinks for the beggars, who were more than usually offensive
and pertinacious, especially the women with sick babies, who would
insist on wishing one a Happy New Year in every key. It’s no use being
pitiful, for if you give to one you will have a tail of a hundred at
your heels.

The New Year’s festivities last for a fortnight or so; it is an endless
succession of feasting and fireworks until the Feast of Lanterns,
twelve days after New Year’s Day. The latter is quite a bright scene
with all the lanterns and transparencies, but it sounds much more than
it is.

I must tell you something about the Chinese travellers who are
going to Europe, and whom you will see or hear about. Mr. Hart, the
Inspector-General of Customs, is going home on leave, and the Chinese
Government have ordered his Chinese secretary, with his son and three
young Chinamen, students of European languages, to accompany him. Pin
Chun, the gentleman in question, has been raised to the Clear Blue
Button, third grade, and made an honorary chief clerk in the Foreign
Office on the occasion. His son has been made a clerk in the Foreign
Office. It is a great pity that the Chinese did not choose a more
intelligent and younger man than Pin Chun, who is sixty-four years old,
and a shocking twaddle. He and his son are, from what I have seen and
heard of them, quite incapable of forming just appreciations of what
they will see. Then, for their first mission to Europe, although it
has no official character, they should have chosen a mandarin of more
importance than Pin, whose reports will have but little weight with the
lettered class of Chinese; indeed, these are jealous of his promotion,
and consider that his distinction is too cheaply earned. The reason of
Pin’s having been chosen is that he is a connection by marriage with
one of the ministers of the Chinese Foreign Office. He is said to be
very popular in Pekingese society, so at any rate, when he comes back,
what he has seen will be talked about in the “highest circles”; and
he is personally acquainted with the Prince of Kung, who proposed the
mission to him at a wedding breakfast. Pin has no official character
as envoy. He is told to travel and write down all about the “hills
and streams” of the countries he visits, and he will be trotted about
to every object of interest. I only hope that he will not be too much
lionised. It would be misinterpreted here, where people would say at
once, “See what great people we are; when a private traveller among us
goes to your country he is received with the respect which you know is
due to a superior intelligence, but your barbarian ministers even are
not received here,—of course our Emperor is great and powerful, and you
are only here on sufferance.”

I must leave off. I am just starting to Tientsing to see Saurin off,
alas! and when I come back it will be to almost entire solitude.

Perhaps I have spoken rather too slightingly of Pin Chun’s mission. It
is a small thing in itself, but we all look upon it as the first step
towards permanent missions in Europe and better relations here.




                              LETTER XXIV


                                          PEKING, _12th April 1866_.

I am going to tell you about an entertainment at the house of a Chinese
mandarin. You will have gathered from my former letters to you that we
see nothing of the Chinese in their own houses; their life and habits
are a sealed book to us. We only see the mandarins in full dress and
with the mask they wear in conference. It was a great pleasure to me,
therefore, to make the acquaintance of a Chinese gentleman of good
position, who is so far enlightened above his fellows as to like and
even seek the society of Europeans, and learn what he can from them.
Yang Lao Yeh is a mandarin wearing a blue button of the third grade;
he is nominally on the staff of the officials of the Board of War, but
his private fortune of some ten or twelve thousand pounds a year makes
him independent of his office, except in so far as his social rank
is concerned (for, as you know, in China, to hold office is to be a
gentleman). I became acquainted with him through the Russian Legation,
with which he has had intercourse for some three years or more, and
he invited a party of us to his house at the time of the Feast of
Lanterns. He occupies a large house in the Chinese city. We went to
him at about eleven o’clock in the morning. As he had not expected us
quite so early we spent half an hour in going over the premises. I
had never before seen the interior of a Chinese gentleman’s home; I
imagined, however, that Yang’s would be a very favourable specimen of a
rich man’s house. It is very pretty, with innumerable courtyards round
which the dwelling-houses are built. The principal court surrounds
a small artificial pond, in the centre of which is a sort of glass
summer-house approached by two little miniature bridges with tiny white
lions of white marble guarding them at intervals. Rockeries, which are
a very favourite garden ornament, caves, grottoes, and turrets with
battlements, all on a Liliputian scale, are crammed wherever there is
room, in a most picturesque defiance of order and architecture. The
only attempts at flowers and shrubs are a few of the famous dwarfed
trees, trained so as to represent with their branches characters of
good omen, such as Happiness, Longevity, etc. A broad terrace walk
surmounts the whole. But besides having the most perfect luxury _à la
Chinoise_, Yang is a great amateur of all European inventions. He has
a room fitted up after our fashion, and his whole house is full of
guns, telescopes, clocks, barometers, thermometers, and other foreign
importations. He has even gone so far as to fit up a photographic
studio, and takes lessons in the art, which he practises with
considerable success. He gave us really capital portraits of himself
of his own execution. When we had wandered all over the house Yang led
us into the private apartments where breakfast had been prepared for
us. Here he presented to us his son, a very small boy of sixteen, but
a white-buttoned mandarin, nevertheless (of course the rank had been
purchased; in China both civil and military rank can be bought). The
ladies of the family, resplendent in silks and satins of many colours,
and painted so that not a particle of _themselves_ was visible, were
separated from us by a curtain through which they kept continually
peeping, anxious to see, and not unwilling to be seen. We were joined
by two mandarins, one from the Board of Punishments, the other from the
Board of Revenue, both very cheery and talkative. The breakfast was by
far the highest effort of Chinese culinary art that I have yet seen;
a certain marinade of venison, especially, was beyond praise. Being
asked to eat with chop-sticks always rather reminds me of the fable of
the fox who invited the stork to dinner, and makes me appreciate the
feelings of the stork on that occasion; but Yang had provided forks, so
we were able to eat on equal terms with our entertainer, who, apropos
of chopsticks, told us a story of a courtier who was so expert with
that utensil that when a grain of rice once fell from the Imperial lips
he caught it between his sticks as it fell, for which feat he was on
the spot promoted to high office and emoluments.

The only fault of the breakfast was that there was too much of it, and
as we were perpetually being pledged by our host and his friends in
warm wine of the headiest nature (no heeltaps), matters were beginning
to look serious, when happily the dishes were cleared away and tea
was brought. I thought the eating was all over, but not a bit of it:
it was only a pause in our labours; for in came a huge and delicious
tureen of bird’s-nest soup and pigeons’ eggs with cream of rice in
bowls to drink—excellent, but stodgy,—and so a Chinese feast goes on
all day without a halt. We witnessed an instance of the duty which a
Chinese son shows to his father; for not only did Yang’s son not sit
down to dinner with us, but he waited at table like a sort of upper
servant, handing his father’s pipe, and anticipating all our wants.
Amongst other things which he forced upon us was a bottle of Curaçoa,
which much delighted the Chinese guests. I ought to have mentioned that
before breakfast began, a company of acrobats made their appearance
to perform in the yard. The contortionists were two women and four
little girls. The band, which hardly stopped clashing during upwards
of three hours, consisted of a gong, two pair of cymbals, and a single
kettledrum, beaten by men. The performance was chiefly rope-dancing
and tumbling; the tricks were not in themselves as good as what we see
daily in the streets of European cities, but the difficulty of them
was enhanced by the performers all being small-footed. The elder woman
was amazingly strong. Lying on her back she balanced tables, chairs,
and other heavy objects on her feet as if they had been feathers, and
wound up by taking a large wine jar into which a little girl had been
put, like the forty thieves in the _Arabian Nights_, and tossing it
about on her tiny goat’s hoofs in the most alarming manner. Whenever a
trick was reaching its climax, the band, indefatigable and painfully
conscientious, beat away vigorously, making the morning hideous with
their _charivari_. To rest the women, who then took their places at
the musical instruments, the men began to show off some juggling
tricks. It was a mean performance, however, the tricks being all of
the commonest and most transparent—such as the production of bowls
of fishes, flower-pots, etc. The best trick was the waving of a sort
of whip of paper twelve yards long and four inches wide, attached to
a short stick. This the performer brandished and flourished in all
directions, making the paper assume all manner of graceful shapes:
now it was a snake crawling in huge coils along the ground, now a
spiral column like Donato the one-legged dancer’s scarf, now a series
of hoops through which the juggler skipped backwards and forwards.
This was a very exhausting exercise. During the performances a rather
amusing dialogue was carried on between the old man of the party and
a small boy who acted the part of Mr. Merryman, steadily refusing to
believe in the possibility of the tricks announced. The acrobats were
not paid their fee all at once, but instead of giving applause for
any particularly successful exertion, Yang would send them out money,
and as we, according to Chinese custom, did the same, they received a
plentiful largesse. One point of contrast between rope-dancing in China
and in Europe is its decency. The women all wore their heavy winter
trousers and loose jackets fastened at the waist by a sash—a costume
which shows no outline of the form.

We stayed with Yang until three in the afternoon. I believe he had
expected us to spend the night in his house; but the entertainment was
becoming wearisome; besides, the Chinese do not understand our ideas
of comfort—paper windows, thorough draughts, stone floors, and hard
benches explain why they wrap themselves up in wadding and furs, and
wear boots an inch thick in the soles. They are far behind the Turks in
these respects. I, for one, thought a night in the Chinese city rather
too much of a good thing, and was glad to make my bow. Our host, his
son, and his Chinese guests, who, by the bye, had at an early hour gone
off to a back room to enjoy a pipe of opium, came to the outer gate to
see us off, and we parted with many expressions of goodwill on both
sides.

I have had a deal of talk with Yang; he is certainly by far the most
advanced Chinaman I have met yet. Railways and telegraphs, which are
the bugbears of the Chinese ministers, are to him necessities which it
is foolish to stave off; indeed, he spoke to me about constructing a
tramway and telegraph over his property in Shantung for the convenience
of communicating with his tenants and agents. Any new European
invention which he hears of, instead of shaking his head and saying,
“Ai ya! it is very wonderful!” he sends for and tries to introduce
into the country. Indeed, more than this, if he is not called to high
office next year, he proposes visiting Europe, Russia, France, and
England; perhaps he will go home with me.

The Peking races came off on the 4th inst. They were a great success.
The course was made at a place called Wang-ho-lou, about three miles
outside the city. It is the bed of an old lake dried up; a pretty spot
surrounded by hillocks, and with the mountains in the background. Every
mound was covered with thousands of Chinese who had come to gape and
wonder at the barbarian sports. Two of the ministers of the Foreign
Office, Hêng and Chung, came to the grand stand. Old Chung had brought
with him his grandson, a smart little fellow of eight years old, as
dignified as a judge, and far graver than his grandfather. I made the
little fellow sit by me at breakfast, and plied him with good things,
of which he expressed his approbation with the solemnity of a Burleigh.
Wine I could not get him to touch, not even champagne. Altogether,
considering the means, or rather want of means, at our disposal, we
managed to have a capital day’s sport. Our little ponies are very
fast. An old pony that Saurin gave me, “Kwan-du,” won the half-mile
race, running it in one minute and five seconds, without training,
and with 11 stone on his back. Between our races the two ministers
made the officers of their escort show off their ponies; one, a small
gray pony of Hêng’s, was a regular little beauty, and would have been
much admired in Rotten Row. But I think that the prettiest pony on the
course was a little bay pony that I call “Hop-o’-my-thumb”—a little
fellow that I bought some time ago to replace my cob, which, according
to my usual luck, went lame in the shoulder without hope of cure. The
Chinese on the race day were not so civil as usual; we had much ado to
keep the course, and when we were going away they yelled, shouted, and
shrieked at us like a pack of wolfish fiends. They even went so far
as to throw a few stones, none of which struck any one; of course, in
such a crowd it was impossible to identify all the offenders; however,
one or two got well thrashed. A little while ago I was riding with Sir
Rutherford and a lady to the Temple of Heaven, when at the bottom of
the main street of the Chinese city we were mobbed and attacked with
stones and brickbats, one of which struck our escort. It is no use
complaining to the authorities—we get no redress. I have begun to
think for some time past that the _bonhomie_ of the Chinese, which was
so taking to me at first, is only a mask to cover hatred and disgust,
happily tempered by the most abject terror and cowardice. However that
may be, we are the masters for the present, and they know it—that is
all that is required.

We are enjoying lovely spring weather now, warm and genial, with a
little rain to remind one of home. The town is beginning to show a
little green from the wall, on which dog-violets and vetches, very
much dried up and sapless, are putting their noses out of the crannies
between the bricks.


                                                       _13th April._

Mail-day. No letters from home for a month past, and we hear that the
mail has broken down at Galle.




                               LETTER XXV


                                          PEKING, _22nd April 1866_.

Since I last wrote I have done nothing and seen nothing that I have not
told you about over and over again. However, to-morrow morning I am off
for a three weeks’ trip into Mongolia with Dr. Pogojeff of the Russian
Legation. We shall go out of China by the Nan Ko̔u Pass, and come in
by my former route of Ku-Pei-Ko̔u. I am looking forward with immense
interest to seeing a little of Mongol life for the first time. It
will be a new experience. I am afraid that one mail must pass without
taking you any news of me; but when I return I hope to make amends.
We had a great field-day at the Tsung-Li Yamên last week. Railroads,
telegraphs, violation of treaties, etc., all the old stories that have
been trotted out a hundred times. The Prince of Kung was very nervous
and fidgety. He twisted, doubled, and dodged like a hare. At last
when Sir Rutherford had him, as he thought, fairly in a corner, I saw
a gleam of hope and joy come over the Prince’s face. He had caught a
sight of his old friend and refuge in trouble, my eyeglass. In a moment
he had pounced upon it, and there was an end of all business. The whole
pack of babies were playing with it, and our Chief, who was furious,
saw his sermons scattered to the wind. It does not signify, though, for
these tricksters will promise anything. It is the performance which
is lacking. By the bye, when the Prince of Kung calls at a Legation
he leaves a card in the shape of a slip of red paper with his name
and title upon it—Kung Chi̔n Wang.[13] But he never signs his name to
documents; he subscribes them, Wu ssŭ hsin—“No private heart,” _i.e._
“disinterested.”

A Cantonese named Ma, whom I know and who has come up to Peking on
business, was anxious to buy a little Pekingese slave-girl, and I was
present at the negotiations. The child, a bright little creature eight
years of age, was brought by her parents to Ma’s lodging, and as she
gave satisfaction, the question resolved itself into one of price, and
here the fun began, for the little thing was so keen to go that she
eagerly took part with the purchaser in beating down the vendors; and,
finally, a bargain was struck at 28 dollars. At that price she was
handed over to her new owner, together with a bill of sale, of which
here is a translation:—

“This is a deed of sale. Wan Chêng, of the village of Wan Ping, has
a child the offspring of his body, being his second daughter and his
seventh child, aged eight years. Because his house is poor, cold, and
hungry, relying on what has passed between a third person and his wife,
he has determined to sell his daughter to one named Ma. He sells her
for twenty-eight dollars, every dollar to be worth seven tiaos and a
half. The money has been paid over in full under the pen” (_i.e._ at
this time of writing). “The girl is to obey her master and to depend
upon him for her maintenance. In the event of any difficulties or
doubts arising on the part of the girl’s family, the seller alone is
responsible, it does not regard the buyer. It is to be apprehended that
calamities may occur to the child, but that is according as Heaven
shall decree; her master is not responsible. None henceforward may
cross the door to meddle in her affairs. This agreement has been made
openly face to face. In case of any inquiries being made this document
is to serve as proof.” (Here follow the signatures or rather marks
of the vendor, the middleman, and a third person as witness, and the
date.) “The child’s birthday is the 11th day of the 6th month, she was
born between the seventh and eighth hours.”

Ma declares that as soon as the girl is grown up he shall let her
marry. He says, “My no wanchee do that black heart pidgin.” I believe
he will keep his word—it is a matter of business, and in business the
southern Chinese trader is scrupulously honest.

As for the child, she was simply in a fever of delight at leaving her
parents. I dare say her poor little life had been none too rosy; for
what says the proverb? “Better one son, though deformed, than eighteen
daughters as wise as the apostles of Buddha.”

I wonder whether any European ever witnessed such a transaction before.

I have been spending the last few days chiefly in Paternoster Row,
the Liu Li Chang, sitting at the feet of a very learned little Chinese
Gamaliel, who tells me wonderful stories about the arts and the old
craftsmen of China. He is a bookseller by trade, but being a great
connoisseur, he always has a few rare specimens of cloisonné enamel,
jade, rock crystal, cornelian, or porcelain in his shop. He is never
weary of telling how the Emperor Ching Ta̔i (A.D. 1450) used to work
at cloisonné enamel (like Louis XVI. at locks, and Peter the Great
at boat-building); how some even say that he even invented the art,
to which the Chinese still give his name, calling it Ching Ta̔i Lan,
Ching Ta̔i’s blue; how the great family of potters, the Langs, died out
in the beginning of the seventeenth century, carrying their secrets
with them to the grave, and how ever since that time the Chinese have
been trying to discover their methods—but all in vain—only producing,
instead of a wonderful _sang de bœuf_ of so soft a paste that it looks
as if you might scoop it out with a spoon, the, as he calls them,
inferior imitations, to which the French gave the name of Céladon
Jaspé, and which the great metal workers, such as Caffieri, used to
delight in mounting. Cloisonné enamel, by the bye, went out of fashion
at the end of the last century, and the Chinese ceased to make it; but
when, after the sacking of the Summer Palace, the specimens looted
there and sent home fetched such wonderful prices in London and Paris,
they routed out the drawers in which their forbears had carefully
locked their recipes—for a Chinaman never destroys anything—and soon
the market will be flooded with new work. The first specimen was
brought to me at the Legation the other day, and very good it was.

The rose-backed plates and cups dear to the keen-eyed loungers at
Christie’s can never have been the fashion at Peking, where men chiefly
love the brave colours and bold designs of the artists of the Ming
dynasty, and where purses are opened wide for ever so small a piece
of the thickly glazed ware of the days of the Yuan and the Sung. From
Ka̔ng Hsi’s reign to the end of Chien Lung’s, A.D. 1796, one seems
to feel the Jesuit, or European, influence in the substitution of
arabesques for the old barbaric designs. The great age for art in China
and Japan, as in Europe, was the cinque cento; the meanest, the dawn of
the nineteenth century.




                              LETTER XXVI


                                            PEKING, _23rd May 1866_.

I returned from my Mongolian expedition last Friday, the 18th,
half-starved and burnt to a cinder, but very jolly. I copy my journal
for you.

We left Peking, the doctor and I, on the 23rd April. We took with
us my servant Chang Hsi, groom, and fat cook. We of course rode our
own horses, while five mules carried the servants and baggage. The
doctor’s dog Drujok, a half-bred Russian setter, and my Prince, a heavy
shambling puppy whom I call a Newfoundland, but whose _seize quartiers_
it would be difficult to prove, made up the party. Our cavalcade made
a great sensation in the streets of Peking. “Here’s a game,” shouted
the street—arabs, piggish in many respects besides their tails; “look
at the devils and the devil dogs!” We went out at the Tê Shêng Mên
(Victory Gate). So soon as we had passed the dusty streets and suburbs
obstructed by carts and camels, whose bells and dull tramp irritate
one’s ears, while the dust they shuffle up blinds and chokes one, the
ride became delightful. The fresh green of the budding trees and young
spring crops and the tints of the distant hills were new life to eyes
tired with the monotonous grays of a Peking winter. It was a lovely day
too, bright, sunny, and cooled by a fresh breeze from the mountains.

Former experience of carts had decided me to take mules; but it was out
of the frying-pan into the fire. Carts are slow, mules are slower. If
one takes carts the servants are sure to stow away one ragamuffin at
least to help them with their work and add to the expense. If one takes
mules the muleteer is sure to add a number of mules carrying wares for
trade at the different towns, which creates endless delays. Besides,
the pack-mules cannot keep up with the horses, and it is no joke to
arrive at an inn, tired and hungry, with the choice of ordering a bad
Chinese dinner, or waiting three hours for the cook to come up and
prepare a better one. Being in advance, we always had to find our own
way from place to place; easy enough if one could even get a direct
answer, but you might as well expect that from a Reading Quaker.

_Englishman_—“I borrow a light from your intelligence.”

_Native_—“Hao shwo! You are very polite.”

_E._—“How far is it from here to Sha-Ho?”

_N._—“How far is it from here to Sha-Ho? Oh! you’re going to Sha-Ho,
are you?”

_E._—“Yes! How far is it?”

_N._—“How far from here, eh? What are you going to do at Sha-Ho?”

_E._—“Just going for an excursion. But how far is it?”

_N._—“Just going for an excursion, eh?”

This sort of thing goes on until you thoroughly lose your temper,
seeing which an old man in the crowd holds up his forefinger and
thumb in an oracular manner. This to the initiated signifies that
Sha-Ho is eight (not two) li distant (the li is about one-third of a
mile). The Chinese have a way of counting with their fingers, which
is as necessary to learn as the numerals of the spoken language. They
constantly answer a question of figures by holding up one hand without
speaking. Up to five it is all plain sailing, but beyond that it is not
so easy. The thumb and little finger mean _six_; thumb and two first
fingers, _seven_; thumb and forefinger, _eight_, forefinger crooked,
_nine_; second finger doubled over forefinger, or whole hand shown,
first palm and then back, _ten_.

We passed our first night at Chang-ping-chou, which was a slight
roundabout, but my companion wanted to see the Ming tombs about which
I wrote to you last autumn. We found all the inns full, but a small
beggar boy, who, possibly with an eye to copper cash, took a great
interest in our proceedings, led us to a neat little inn outside the
walls where we were quiet and cleanly lodged.


                                                       _24th April._

We had all the trouble in life this morning to get the mules to start.
Threats of stoppages of pay were the only means of acting on the
muleteers. Even so we only got off by eight o’clock. The doctor and
I, accompanied by my man Chang Hsi, were to visit the tombs, while
the mules, not being supposed capable of deriving either profit or
amusement from the sight, were to precede us to Nan-Ko̔u, and there
wait our arrival. The valley of the tombs was not so bright and rich as
when I saw it with the autumn crops in all their luxuriance, but there
were plenty of wild-flowers, dog-violets, wild iris, convolvulus, and
others, and the persimmon trees were a mass of bloom. The avenue of
monstrous statues appeared tame to me in the glare of day after having
seen their weird and ghostly appearance by moonlight, but the site and
buildings must always be striking. There are plenty of temples and
palaces in and near Peking as large and as magnificent, but none in
such good proportion; they all look like “imitation” by the side of the
Thirteen Tombs.

We had to ride back to within a few hundred yards of Chang-ping-chou
before we could reach the sandy and stony road which leads to Nan-Ko̔u.
It was burning hot, but as the Russians say, “Heat breaks no bones,”
and with fresh, pure air to breathe it does not much signify how hot
it is. In Peking it is another matter. We reached Nan-Ko̔u at 2 P.M.
The little town is prettily situated at the bottom of the famous pass
to which it gives its name. Steep cliffs enclose it on either side; a
stream of clear water—rare sight in these parts—passes through it; and
the cottages in the valley are surrounded by trees and corn-fields.
The hills are wild and bold, with here and there bits of wall, towers,
and perhaps a temple or shrine on the ridges. The constant tinkling of
camel and mule bells testifies to the amount of traffic. Every other
house is an inn, and all seem bustling and prosperous. There was plenty
of movement and plenty of noise in our inn-yard; muleteers, carters,
footpads, poultry, and asses kept up a perpetual wrangling, crowing,
and braying, while an improvisatore in the kitchen opposite was earning
his night’s board and lodging by reciting tales of an unedifying
character for the benefit of the host and his guests of lower degree.
Although we had arrived so early, we thought it better to stop the
night at Nan-Ko̔u and go on in the morning, so we had time for a stroll
among the hills after dinner.


                                                       _25th April._

We started at six, riding donkeys in order to spare the ponies the
rough work of the pass. The Nan-Ko̔u pass is certainly in its way
very fine. The valley, which is a gradual ascent, is bounded on either
side by steep, abrupt hills, as barren and wild as a Scotch glen; a
few trees stud it at intervals, and a narrow thread of water runs
through it. There are plenty of shrines about, and always perched upon
cliffs so steep that one is lost in wonder how they ever got there.
Amongst these I noticed a form of sacred monument that was new to me,
but constantly repeated along this road—five white-washed earthen
cones like sugar-loaves, with bats[14] or other emblems rudely painted
on them; I guess that they represent the five offerings exposed on
Buddhist altars. As an instance of the difficulty of obtaining reliable
information, and to show how cautiously travellers’ statements about
China must be accepted, I asked three respectable Chinese by the road
what was the meaning of these five cones. One said that they were to
keep off foxes and wolves, another that they marked every five li along
the road, and the third that they were Buddhist emblems, but he did
not know what they represented. The pass itself, considering that it
is the highway between Mongolia and China, is a very miracle of bad
roads. It is as if nature had in some stupendous convulsion burst a
passage through the mountains, leaving all the débris in the most
glorious confusion, which man has been too idle to reduce to order.
Huge boulders of rock at every step obstruct a way which is difficult
enough already, and the overhanging cliffs seem as if they were on the
point of throwing down more masses to block up the road. Asses are
far the best mounts for this work. Ours carried us capitally, urged
by constant revilings from their rascally drivers. “Egg of a turtle!
what are you stopping for!” is the mildest of their adjurations, the
turtle not being used as significative of slowness, but as an euphemism
for cuckold. There are plenty of villages in the pass; the inhabitants
do a small trade in tea, hard-boiled eggs, and laopings (a sort of
girdle-cake), which they sell to wayfarers. There is one very pretty
little town, Chu-Yung-Kwan, with a curious old gateway richly carved
with quaint figures and inscriptions in Chinese, Manchu, Mongolian,
and Thibetan, said to be a relic of the Yuan or Mongol dynasty. At
the top of the pass, just before the slight descent which leads to
the plateau on the west, is an old ruined fortified enclosure called
Pa Ta Ling, “the eight great peaks.” It is a curious place, for the
inside is literally a heap of ruins and rubbish, while the walls and
fortifications are almost perfect.

We breakfasted at Cha Tao at the end of the pass, some 15 miles, and
very tiring miles too, from Nan-Ko̔u. After Cha Tao the road lies along
a sandy plain, probably once a lake, to Hwai Lai Hsien, a pretty model
of a Chinese town, with crenelated walls and quaint towers. East of
the town is a small river, spanned by what once has been a handsome
five-arched bridge, now of course falling into ruin and decay. Hard by,
on a low hill, stands a temple like an Italian monastery. We put up for
the night at Hwai Lai Hsien, having ridden some 35 miles from Nan-Ko̔u.
We had some difficulty in finding an inn. The people of the east side
of the town sent us to the west, and the people of the west incited us
to go back to the east. The mules and servants were behind us, and we
were left entirely to our own resources. At last my horse decided the
question by bolting down a courtyard, which turned out to be that of
the best inn in the place, but which, it having no signboard, I had
missed.


                                                       _26th April._

We had a dullish ride to-day to Hsin Pao An, passing a few small towns,
all fortified, probably against Mongol invasions; at one of these, Tu
Mu, we made our mid-day halt. Hsin Pao An is a very pretty little town.
One Chinese town is generally so like another that if you have seen
one you have seen all. Here, however, there is a very curious building
in the middle of the place; it is a sort of compromise between an
English town-hall, a mediæval fortress, and a Chinese temple; it gives
a distinction to the town. It is so very rare to see a drunken man in
China that it is almost worth recording that one rushed into our rooms
here, and was proceeding to lay hands on the doctor, who shook him off
in great astonishment, when the people of the inn came in and turned
him out, with many apologies for the annoyance.


                                                       _27th April._

The main feature in the plain on leaving Hsin Pao An is a steep
mountain, or rather precipitous and jagged rock, perhaps 800 or 1000
feet high, called Nei Nei Shan. It stands at the western end of
the plain, immediately to the east of the Yang Ho, “sheep river,”
which winds beneath it. On the very summit of this rock is a temple,
about which there is a legend which reminds one of Rolandseck and
Nonnenwerth. A prince of these parts had engaged to throw a bridge over
the river in a single night, or forfeit his life. He set about his
task, but when the sun rose in the morning the work was unfinished, so
in despair and in fulfilment of his vow he threw himself into the river
and was drowned. His widow erected this temple that she might pass
her life in mourning in constant sight of the spot where her husband
had disappeared. I have the very worst authority for this legend, of
which, by the bye, Bell gives another version quoted by Michie. The
Chinese about the place have never heard of it; however, I dare say it
is as true as most other legends; at any rate there stand the hill and
the temple, and there live (heaven knows how) five priests, exposed
to the full glare of the sun, and to every cold wind that blows, and
obliged to fetch even the water they drink up an almost inaccessible
height from the plain below. This day’s journey, following the Yang Ho
in a north-westerly direction, was very picturesque and varied, but
often rocky to a degree. However, our little Mongol horses behaved
like goats; they never stumble except on a flat road, where they get
careless and lazy. There is plenty of coal in these hills, which is
worked in the meanest manner and sent to Peking on camels. A geologist
who has examined this part of China, and especially the mountains to
the west, affirms it to be the richest coalfield in the world, but
the Chinese do not take advantage of it. We met plenty of travellers
of all degrees, the richer ones travelling in mule litters, a mode of
conveyance which looks to me as if it might bring on sea-sickness; and
numberless caravans laden with tea for Russia.

We rested at a poor little town called Hsiang Shui Pu, and put up
for the night at Hsuan Hua Fu, a large district city. Here in the
suburbs we found an inn which was a palace compared with those we had
put up in hitherto, though an English labourer’s cottage would not
suffer by contrast with the room I slept in. A certain amount of new
paper in the windows gave a promise of cleanliness and decency within
that was not fulfilled by the broken brick floor and musty tables and
benches; however, there were plenty of shabby, tawdry lanterns, and if
characters of good omen could give appetite and a good night’s rest,
we ought to have eaten like ogres and slept like the Seven Sleepers.
We were a good deal lionised here; indeed, the inquisitiveness of
the people was very troublesome. As I was lathering my face before
dinner, trying to get rid of the deposit of two or three sandstorms,
the curse of travellers in North China, a carter walked coolly into
my bedroom smoking his pipe, and went into fits of laughter at the
sight. I, irritated by the intrusion, flung the contents of my soapy
sponge into his face—which must have very much astonished it, for it
was much in the same state as the fists of the Irish boatman two years
after he had shaken hands with the Lord Lieutenant; and my enemy
fled howling. Presently another gentleman appeared who addressed me
as “Venerable Teacher”—a high compliment—and informed me that his
name was Ma, and that he was a merchant of caps travelling from west
to east; after which he retired, but shortly put his head in again to
ask my honourable name and nation, and I heard him afterwards in the
yard explaining to a knot of carters, muleteers, and loungers, that
I was the English teacher Mi, that I understood good manners, that
my body was all over pockets, and that my years were not few; which
statements the auditors received with many grunts and eructations and
repeated several times, afterwards one by one sauntering up to judge
for themselves. I happened to be emptying my pockets at the time of
Ma’s visit. Pockets are not used by the Chinese; they have, it is true,
purses or pouches at their girdle, but they are very small. The chief
receptacle for miscellaneous articles is the boot. My first teacher
used to pull writing materials and sugar-plums indiscriminately from
his boot, and always politely offered me the latter before tasting
them himself. Old Hêng-Chi, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, who is
_malade imaginaire_ and always dosing himself, constantly pulls pills
or other pet remedies out of his boot. European pockets are always
provocative of wonder. The noises of the inn-yard made sleep out of
the question till long past midnight. The worst of all was an old
carter wrapped up in his sheepskin, sitting on the shaft of his cart
and beating a sort of death-watch with a stick on a piece of hollow
bamboo, like a ghoulish old woodpecker. I went out and tried to chaff
him out of his performance, but he took my irony for high praise, which
so delighted him that he every now and then burst into snatches of song
in a high squeaky falsetto, never stopping his eternal devil’s tattoo.
Mules, asses, horses, and quarrelling Chinamen made up a fitting chorus.


                                             _Saturday, 28th April._

Rode through the town of Hsuên Hwa Fu, which, for China, is in
tolerable repair. Though small as “Fu’s” go, it is pretty enough.
There are plenty of trees, chiefly huge willows and poplars, and a
great variety of quaint towers, pagodas, and other buildings. The
plain below is busily tilled, and, I should think, must be fertile;
but the crops are far behind those of the Peking plain, and the first
sowings have not yet put out shoots. Here amongst the numerous by-roads
and water-courses we lost our way, being, as usual, far ahead of our
mules. Seeing a group of boys working a few fields off I rode across
to ask the way; their backs were turned to me, and it was only when I
jumped over a low mud wall into the midst of them that they perceived
me. A shark appearing in Cuckoo weir while the Eton boys are bathing,
could not have produced a greater panic. With one consent the urchins
shouted out, “The Devil! The Devil!” and bolted for dear life. At last
I succeeded in capturing and calming one of them, sufficiently to
discover that we were about an hour and a half’s ride out of the right
road (no joke to men fasting and under such a sun). The deviation from
the regular route accounted for the terror caused by my appearance; the
boys had probably never seen a foreigner before.

Late in the afternoon we reached Chang Chia Ko̔u, which the Mongols
call Khalgan, the frontier town between China and Mongolia. It is the
first great halting-place on the road from Peking to Moscow. Formerly,
when the importation of tea into Russia by sea was forbidden, the whole
of the tea-supply passed from Tientsing through Chang Chia Ko̔u, and
there is still a great traffic, but, of course, it is much diminished.
The Russians have no important export trade to China. They have a
small export trade in cloth, which they manufacture, of a kind and
at a cost with which other producers cannot compete, for their cloth
exactly suits the Chinese, being of pure wool, very broad, and cheap;
but they cannot send it in any large quantity. At Peking, Tientsing,
and some of the large towns in North China, there are also to be found
miscellaneous articles of Russian manufacture, such as samovars,
knives, prints, looking-glasses, etc., but, as a rule, Siberia being
a non-manufacturing country and too short-handed to become one, goods
have to come from too far for their transport to pay. I believe that
the Russians have found their connection with China to be, on the
whole, a losing business. They have to pay silver—paper roubles will
not pass—for their tea, and must continue to do so as long as they
cannot establish an export trade; they are trying to obtain certain
rights of trading in Mongolia, but the Chinese cannot be persuaded
of the justice of transferring a monopoly of their own merchants to
a powerful neighbour. In the far north they have obtained certain
harbours which open the Chinese seas and the Pacific to them; but the
harbours are frozen for several months, and the advantage has saddled
them with huge tracts of country which it is hard for them to rule,
and still harder for want of manual labour to turn to profit. Russia
looks to the days of railways and telegraphs through Siberia, which
are probably not very far distant,[15] to balance the account. The
truth is that the English and Americans are the only people who have a
real commercial interest in China. The Russian interest is at present
simply one of boundaries. With the French the Chinese question is
one of missionaries and jealousy of the _interests_ of other nations
in the Far East,—_interests_ being with French alarmists synonymous
with _influence_. The German nations cannot as yet be said to have
any great stake here, though they have plenty of subjects in China,
principally clerks in great houses or small merchants. Portugal has a
very cleverly worded treaty with the Chinese, who will not ratify it
because it would cede to her the sovereignty of Macao, where she has a
flourishing trade, under the name of Chinese coolie emigration. Spain
has a treaty in an embryo state, and conterminal interests on account
of her Philippine Islands; and Belgium has a treaty, one resident
subject, and a ship trading here once in three years or so. The Danes
have a treaty, but little commerce. Italy two or three years ago
planned a mission hither, but it broke down. Even should the Russians
succeed in obtaining the privileges they are working for in Mongolia,
their Chinese trade would be but a drop in the ocean compared with our
immense commercial interests.


                                                       _29th April._

In spite of the remonstrances and even tears of our head muleteer, who
predicted certain starvation for ourselves and our mules, we decided on
pushing as far as Llama Miao, the great horse-fair in Mongolia, and
returning home _via_ Ku Pei Ko̔u to vary the journey. We accordingly
resolved to stop a day at Chang Chia Ko̔u to rest the horses and lay
in rice, flour, and other provisions, with provender for the cattle.
The delay gave us time to see the bustling little town which trade has
redeemed from the dulness of its neighbours. The streets are full of
animation. Fortune-tellers, improvisatori, and a company of strolling
actors who, gorgeous in stage dresses and burlesque “makes up,” have
taken possession of a small temple, attract crowds of gaping Mongols
and Chinamen. The main street of the suburb resembles a great fair,
lined with stalls like cheap-jack’s booths, at which every conceivable
sort of rubbish is sold. Pipes, rings, ear-rings, sham jewelry and
jade, Mongol knives, purses, cutlery professing to be made by Rodgers
and Son, lucifer matches from Vienna, kaleidoscopes, stereoscopes,
musical boxes and looking-glasses, with reverses quite unfit for
publication, are the chief wares. There is a capital seven-arched
bridge, adorned with lions and apes, across the almost dry river;
and wonderful to say, it is kept in repair, so you may judge how
prosperous the place is and looks. Foreigners excite little attention,
for European travellers are often passing; and besides, there are two
or three resident agents for Russian houses who superintend the loading
of the tea-caravans for Siberia.

One thing necessary before leaving Chang Chia Ko̔u was to get the
seal of the military authorities attached as a _visa_ to my passport.
As I told you last year, the petty provincial officers snap their
fingers at the seal of the Peking yamêns (public offices), but they
respect that of their own immediate chief, whose arm is long enough to
reach them. In the event of meeting with any difficulty on the road I
could not count on getting any official assistance without this seal.
Accordingly, early this morning I sent my passport to the general’s
office, with the request that it might be returned _visé_. At five
o’clock no passport was forthcoming, so I sent to say that I would go
in person to fetch it, and requested an interview with his Excellency.
When I arrived at the Yamên I was told that the great man himself was
ill—the usual excuse—but I was civilly received by his subordinate,
a greasy little blue-buttoned mandarin named Pao, and two others. I
repeated my request to see his Excellency Ah (that is his name), as I
knew how futile it is to treat with subordinate Chinese officials; but
_his_ Excellency only renewed his regrets that he could not see _my_
Excellency, which he hoped was pretty well. As he might be smoking
opium and really unpresentable, I thought it better not to press the
matter further, but attacked Pao on the subject of the seal, which he
fought off granting me on the ground that there was nothing in the
passport saying that I was entitled to it. I answered that the passport
entitled me to expect every aid from him, and that last year the
Ti-tu of Ku Pei Ko̔u had granted us his seal; threatened him with the
thunders of the Prince of Kung’s wrath, and told him (Heaven forgive
me!) how angry our Queen would be if she heard that a member of her
Legation, carrying the passport of the Legation, had been snubbed the
very first time he asked for assistance from a Chinese official. “Would
I like something to eat?” “I was much obliged, but I was not hungry;
I wanted the seal.” “At least a little jam?” “Many thanks, no jam,
but the seal.” “But the seal was really such an unimportant matter.”
“Then why not give it at once as the Ti-tu had done.” (Which, by the
bye, he had not done without a fight.) “Oh, but the Ti-tu lived at Ku
Pei Ko̔u and this was Chang Chia Ko̔u. How could it be done?” “Where
there’s a will there’s a way”—which is an excellent Chinese proverb.
My interlocutors doubled at every moment like hares, now offering
tea, now dinner, now tobacco, anything but the seal. They constantly
consulted together in Manchu, of which of course I did not understand a
word. Every now and then one went out to report, as I imagine, to the
shamming chief what I had said. How obstinate the barbarian was, and
how suspicious, for I took care to let them know that I was not gulled
by the very stale sick dodge. We were more than an hour marching and
countermarching over the same ground. I stuck out for my seal; they
persisted in eluding the question. At last I told Pao that I would
either accept the seal or a separate pass from his Excellency Ah to his
subordinates, but that if they refused to give me one or other I would
write to Peking and complain of their want of courtesy. After some
difficulty they agreed to furnish me with a pass, and even gave orders
for a draft to be written and sent to the hotel for my approval. I
then left them, but with such manifest disgust that they were probably
afraid that I might complain of their conduct, for immediately I
reached the inn a messenger made his appearance, saying that Pao hoped
I was pretty well (which, considering we had just parted, was an excess
of courtesy), and had not quite read my passport to his satisfaction;
would I let him have it back for a few minutes. Ten minutes after this
it was in my hands with the seal attached.

In the meantime our lachrymose muleteers had made off to Peking with
their mules, abandoning their pack-saddles and ropes, and forfeiting
all their earnings, save an advance which I had made them, rather than
face the imaginary horrors of the road to Llama Miao. Here was a pretty
kettle of fish! All hopes of an early start completely bowled out; and
really Chang Chia Ko̔u is a very nice place, but one day is enough of
it.


                                                       _30th April._

The whole of this morning was wasted in fruitless endeavours to get
mules or carts. The carters and muleteers, knowing our anxiety to be
off, demanded fabulous prices, and absolutely declined to start until
to-morrow; we were as determined to make a move to-day. At last, in
despair, the doctor rode off to the Russian agents to see whether
they could not do something to help us. It is no use applying to the
authorities, for their practice in such cases is to be extremely
civil and obliging, at once procure the worst and cheapest beasts in
the place, arrange for a high price, and pocket the difference; and
then when the traveller is a hundred miles or so away from all help
a horse or mule dies of a ripe old age, and the others are so feeble
and decrepit that he does not reach his destination until his stock
of provisions has long been exhausted, and himself has had to suffer
days of needless privation and discomfort. During the doctor’s absence
Chang Hsi, who had gone out as plenipotentiary in another direction,
came back with a treaty for ratification between himself, under the
style of “Chang the great Lord,” and a hirer of carts, who was willing
to convey our baggage to Llama Miao for rather more than double the
proper fare. The doctor’s negotiations were more successful, for he
returned with a wild-looking ruffian, with whom we finally made almost
satisfactory arrangements, though neither promising, coaxing, nor
threatening would induce him to start until the next day.


                                                          _1st May._

A short time since a missionary presented me with a copy of the
_Pilgrim’s Progress_ translated into Chinese, and adorned with
pictures, in which Christian and the other characters appear with
long tails _à la Chinoise_. If any one will produce a similar edition
of _Don Quixote_ for the benefit of the mandarins, I shall recommend
our carter as model for the portrait of the knight. His prominent
nose, lantern jaws, and tall, thin, ungainly figure exactly fit the
character; it is a type I never before saw in China. Any one of his
horses would make a capital Rosinante. We made a late start of it,
not getting off until eight o’clock, and even then our people lagged
behind in the town to buy things. At the gate of the town, where the
Great Wall of China is the frontier mark, we met with no difficulties,
our passports were not examined, and the officials only took down
our names and the number of our party. The day’s march was dull and
monotonous; it lay along a continuously ascending pass, winding between
barren hills, which bounded the view. We met strings of camels, mules,
and bullock-carts, all laden with tea for Russia and Mongolia. The tea
that is imported by the Mongols is of the coarsest quality, and pressed
into large bricks, which look something like cavendish tobacco, only
coarser, and with stronger fibres to bind them together. These bricks
are in some parts the current coin of the country: large transactions
are settled for so many bricks of tea, while smaller payments are made
by cutting pieces off the block as the Chinese cut fragments of silver.
The infusion made from brick tea is coarse and nasty; it often has a
musty taste owing to the damp confined in the cakes, which prevents
their transport by sea.

We breakfasted at Tu-ting, a miserable little village of mud hovels
which at a little distance look like mere holes in the hill; the place
reminded me of a colony of fever-stricken Circassians whom I saw during
their exodus two years ago, burrowing like rabbits in a bank near
Tchernavoda. Barring the fever there was not much choice in appearance
between the two. After Tu-ting the ascent becomes so steep that horses
are kept by the wayside, as on the St. Gothard, to draw up heavy carts
to a ledge on which stands a temple in honour of Kwan Ti, the god of
war, whither pious carters repair to deposit an offering on having
successfully made the ascent. Pa Ta, where we passed the night at the
sign of the “Ten Thousand Perfections,” was hardly richer than Tu-ting.
Our beds were made in the kitchen amid flour-bins, jars of oil, pots of
stinking cheese, and odds and ends of all sorts. It was the best room
of the inn, which was a low hut built of mud and chopped straw, roofed
over, but with the bare ground for a floor. This is not comfort, but _à
la guerre comme à la guerre_.


                                                          _2nd May._

A couple of hours more uphill and we were fairly on the Mongolian
plateau. A branch of the Great Wall runs along the mountains; but
here it is a mere heap of stones thrown together, a wonderful work of
patience, it is true, but lacking the grandeur of the brick-built wall
at Ku Pei Ko̔u; at intervals are rude turrets fallen or falling into
utter decay.

The plateau itself is a vast sea of downs bounded only by the horizon.
It is difficult to conceive anything more desolate; there is neither
tree nor shrub, nothing taller than a few dwarfish buttercups and
campanulas; there is not so much as a stone to sit down upon; for miles
and miles there is no trace of human habitation or handiwork; for miles
and miles one travels without meeting a soul, except by chance a stray
Mongol lumbering heavily along on his camel, or a bullock-cart carrying
tea; of beasts we saw a flock of Hwang-yang antelopes, that scampered
off almost before there was time to recognise them; the dogs started a
fox; a raven was feeding on a dead dog, and a solitary vulture followed
in our wake for hours, as if he expected one or other of us to come to
grief, but for to-day he was disappointed. We rested at Shi Pa Li Tai,
having made an absurdly short day’s journey, but it was impossible to
stir our Don Quixote into anything like activity.


                                                          _3rd May._

We rose long before sunrise, intending to make up for lost time. The
early morning on the steppes is something beautiful. Flocks of larks,
mocking and other birds are singing away as if their throats must
burst, the air is as keen and fresh as possible, and there is just a
sparkling of dew on the ground. On such a morning and on such ground
our little horses, in spite of the journey before them—of which they
always seem to have a sort of instinctive knowledge, for when the
holsters and headstalls are put on, the very worst of them sober down
and behave well—cannot resist a gallop. They lift their heads, and
turning towards the breeze sniff it in by long draughts with a zest
that it is good to see, and spin away like mad things over the steppe
on which they were born and reared. The dogs catch the infection, and
are in the most tearing spirits, careering away far out of sight;
Drujok, whose sporting education has been sadly neglected, setting a
bad example in a wild lark chase, which my puppy Prince is not slow
to follow. Roads across the plateau there are none; and we soon
raced away from all sign of the (at best) puzzling tracks of rare
carts and horses. Here was a pretty mess! Lost on the steppe like
sailors at sea in a cock-boat without a compass! not a landmark of any
sort; a boundless plain with a round horizon! After some while spent
in fruitless consultation, to our joy a speck began to rise on the
horizon; bigger and bigger it grew, until at last it defined itself
into the figure of a very jolly, fat, yellow-robed priest,—a sort of
Mongol Friar Tuck riding on his camel,—who could fortunately speak
a little Chinese. The good-natured fellow, shaking his sides with
laughter at our mischance, put his helm about and rode a mile or two
out of his own way to steer us into ours, so that in the end we found
ourselves at Pan Shan Tu a couple of hours before our people. As we
had started at three in the morning on the strength of a cup of tea
and a couple of eggs, and had been eight hours in the saddle, it was
rather trying to wait until past one o’clock for a meal. Still more
trying was it as the evening closed in, and the gathering clouds warned
us that there would be no moonlight to guide us, to find ourselves 25
miles from our destination, in the middle of the wilderness, and the
cart-horses hardly up to 3 miles an hour. Happily we came upon a group
of Mongol yurts (huts or tents), and their uncouth owners were willing
and able to take us in. Indeed, as I found out afterwards, the huts on
this track are almost available as inns for travellers. We were, as
usual, in advance of our party and unable to speak a word of Mongol;
however, from the yurts there appeared a wild, gaunt figure, which from
its wearing ear-rings and long hair, and from no other sign, I knew to
be a woman; in the kindliest but roughest manner she seized the horses
and led them to a post, to which she tied them, and then opening one
of the yurts, beckoned us to go in and warm ourselves, for it was very
chilly. In this hut were crowded a few men, women, and naked children,
a calf and several lambs, all huddling together round the fire: what an
etching Rembrandt would have made of it! The air was stifling; between
smoke and strong smells it was almost impossible to breathe; however,
the good lady cleared out another hut, which by the time our servants
came up was ready for us.

A Mongol yurt is of the simplest construction. A round, raised floor,
from twelve to fifteen feet in diameter, is made of mud and chopped
straw; round this is built a wall of trellis-work of laths about four
feet high, from which a number of sticks radiate to a point at the top;
a thick covering of pieces of felt tied on with strong cord completes
the hut; even the trellis-work is fastened by thongs of leather passed
through holes made at the point where the laths cross one another. The
whole can easily be taken to pieces and packed on a camel’s back. The
furniture of the interior is not more luxurious than the exterior: in
the centre is an iron fireplace, in which is burnt a fire of horse-
or cow-dung, which is the only fuel to be procured, and is collected
with great pains on the plateau; the smoke, so much at least as does
escape, finds its way through a hole in the middle of the roof; four
iron bars support over the fire the single pan in which all the cooking
of the family is done; round the tent are a few chests and presses of
the rudest Chinese manufacture, and the homeliest of brass pots and
pans from Peking; a few sheep-skins and calf-skins and pieces of felt
represent bed, sofa, and chair; the whole is blackened by much smoke
like a cutty-pipe. A flap of felt serves as door; the hole in the roof
is chimney and window in one, and if it rains that must be covered in.
Perhaps the quaintest thing about the place, and the strongest sign
of the poverty of the land, was the kitchen garden inside the yurt.
A basket or pan and a broken teacup, into which a little mould had
been placed, were beds in which half a dozen carefully-tended heads of
garlic were sprouting! There were no stables; the Mongols do not use
them. When they want a horse they go and catch one out of the herd. Our
horses were tied up to stakes outside. The cattle keep near the camp of
their own accord; the sheep are packed under a shed, so they enjoy a
covering; but the young things—calves, lambs, and kids—are carried into
the yurts and sleep with the other children. Such was our lodging for
the night, and, tired as we were, it did well enough for us. Our dinner
was a more difficult matter; our cook did his best for us, but he was
sorely put to it for saucepans and other requisites. As I said above,
the pan or caldron over the dung-fire is the whole Mongol _batterie de
cuisine_. Into it is thrown a quantity of millet or other grain and
a few lumps of fat mutton or beef, which is stewed in water. When the
solid part of this has been taken out, the greasy water which remains
serves to make the infusion of brick tea. Even the lowest Chinese
cannot stomach this nasty mess, and speak of it with the greatest
disgust. In some parts of Mongolia an infusion of brick tea is made
with boiling milk and salt, and always kept ready in the yurt. This is
said to be very good. I had been looking forward to getting a drink of
fresh milk, but the Mongols all say that their cows have died. Calves a
few days old, and in very good condition, tell another story.

When we had established ourselves in the yurt, the head of the
encampment, introduced by the Meg Merrilies who had taken us in and
done for us, and whom I imagine to have been his wife, came to visit
us. He spoke a little Chinese, which is necessary to him when he goes
to Chang Chia Ko̔u to sell his cattle. He told us he was a military
officer, but without soldiers to command. Of the world beyond Chang
Chia Ko̔u on one side and Llama Miao on the other he knew nothing.
His flocks and his tents were his whole life. The women, young and
old, had no objection to showing themselves; they came to look at us,
and brought their children, whom we made happy with cakes and white
sugar. Round-faced, flat-featured, healthy, dirty, and ugly are the
women; as for the men, sun, wind, and weather have burnt and hardened
them to a degree in comparison with which the most weather-beaten old
sea-dog at Portsmouth or Plymouth is satin-skinned. Men and women alike
are dressed in long sheep-skin robes, with the wool worn inwards, and
round fur caps. Their shapeless dresses and round head-pieces remind
one of the family in the Noah’s arks. The people appear very jolly
and simple, which they are, and very honest, which report says they
are not. Small articles to which they may take a fancy are said to
disappear mysteriously. The Mongolian dogs, several of whom guard
each encampment, to the great discomfiture of Drujok and Prince, who,
on the prowl after water, are constantly attacked by them, are fine
beasts—huge, shaggy fellows, mostly black-and-tan, with glorious tails
curling over their backs; they must be awkward customers. In spite of
the squalor in which our hosts live, they are rich people in their
way, and well-to-do; dirt and wretchedness must be with them a matter
of choice, not necessity, for their thriving flocks find a ready market
at Chang Chia Ko̔u for the supply of Peking. Things which are of the
most ordinary necessity to the poorest Chinaman these comparatively
prosperous people do without. They have not even a teapot or teacup;
and when we suggested washing our faces a rusty old iron basin was
dragged out of some corner where it must have lain unused and forgotten
for months.

It blew a gale of wind in the night, and rain came on, so we were able
to test the comfort of the tent. We suffered neither from cold nor
rain; in fact, nothing could be better adapted than these huts for the
extreme weather of the steppe. If it is fine you can sleep with the sky
above you. If it is cold the felt is a sufficient protection. It was
bitterly chilly outside, but within, although we could not bear a fire
on account of the smoke, we were as warm as toasts.


                                                          _4th May._

A pelting wet morning. We took leave of our friends the Mongols, and
rode to Chang-ma-tsze-chin, a Chinese colony, some twenty miles off, it
being too bad weather to push farther. We made friends with the whole
village through its children. A pedlar happened to be passing that way,
and by investing a few pence in small looking-glasses and such toys, we
made the little boys and girls very happy. To these the pedlar’s pack
of rubbish contained all the wonders of Aladdin’s palace, for had he
not come all the way from Peking? Our door at the inn was thronged with
jolly little urchins for the rest of the day, and we amused ourselves
and them by showing them our watches, pencil-cases, etc. The plains
or valleys here are narrower and surrounded by hills. I climbed one
height, from which I had a fine view over the steppe.


                                                          _5th May._

The beauty of the morning made up for yesterday. We were up by 3 A.M.
The vapours of the night before had settled down in dew on the ground,
the sun was rising brilliantly among fleecy clouds, which continued
all day to throw over the hills lights and shades such as one sees in
Europe—never at Peking, where the sky must either be black with storm,
or deep blue without a speck upon it. We stopped to breakfast at a
Mongol encampment, on the near side of an immense plain. I never saw so
many horses at one time in my life—the plateau was literally alive with
them; they were very shaggy in their winter coats, and did not show to
advantage on the poor commons they had had to put up with during the
winter; but some of them were well built for strength and endurance,
with deep chests, strong quarters, and big barrels. We were received in
the yurt of a widow, named Apakwai, a most ill-favoured dame; however,
her tent was the best in the place, and the cleanest, which is not high
praise. She was rich in furniture, skins, and felt mats, and there was
even some little attempt at decoration about her habitation, a few
Chinese prints of the rudest kind and most defiant of perspective being
pasted on the trellis walls; they were coloured in the garish style so
pleasing to Mongols, who are far more Oriental in this respect than
the sober Chinese. A Mongol swell, riding over the plain, gorgeous in
yellow and vermilion, and with his jolly moon face beaming out of a
yellow cap, red-buttoned and trimmed with sables, is a sight to see.
The ladies are great customers with the Peking jewellers for coral,
pearls, and jade ornaments. A woman, be she never so poor, is sure to
have some piece of finery in the way of ear-rings or head-dress from
Peking. If she cannot afford real jewellery she buys sham.

The widow Apakwai could speak no Chinese, but as every one about the
camp came in to idle away an hour, we had no lack of interpreters.
The chief personage spoke Chinese fluently. Apakwai lost her husband
in the war of 1860, where the Mongols were always sent to the front
to be shot at, and really, with such a wife, he was lucky to get out
of the world. She had a most villainous expression of countenance,
only exceeded in ugliness by her familiar spirit, a little dog of
preternatural hideousness, with a hunch on his back and a revolting
human face. I tried to conciliate him with “po-po,” Chinese cakes,
which he accepted with avidity, and even condescended to sit up and
beg for like a Christian dog, but so soon as my store was exhausted he
snapped at me as spitefully as ever. The old lady had other familiar
spirits even more disgusting, of whose presence she gave evidence by
much unbuttoning of robes and scratching. The widow was very eager for
cigars and white sugar, which we could not spare her, and as she sat
smoking her pipe and grumbling over the money our servants had paid her
for the use of her yurt, she was the picture of greed and avarice. I
added to her gains, but even that did not satisfy her. Altogether, if
I had a pound of cigars, a loaf of sugar, and a purseful of money, I
should be sorry to sleep alone in her yurt. I should dream of Jael and
Sisera all night.

At about two or three miles, at a guess, N.W. of the camp stands a
large temple, Ma Shên Miao, the temple of the horse spirit, most
appropriately placed and dedicated; with my field-glass I could see
large trees, leafless as yet, in its enclosure, the only trees that
we have seen since Chang Chia Ko̔u. Their size shows that the temple
is old, for of course they must have been planted there by the monks.
Between the camp and Shang-tu-ho, where we slept, the plain was
boundless in length, and confined at the sides by picturesque heights
coloured by every variety of light and shade. The distance gave us the
most perfectly deceptive mirage I ever saw. It was exactly like a vast
lake, the hill spurs running out into it like promontories, and forming
bays and creeks. Near Shang-tu-ho we passed by the roadside four stakes
driven into the ground, to each of which was attached a cage containing
the head of a man in a frightful state of decomposition. The tail of
one had escaped from between the bars of the cage, and was dangling to
and fro mournfully in the wind. They were the heads of four Chinese
highwaymen, once the terror of the road; now, poor wretches, they can
only frighten the horses, who may well shy at so ugly a sight. We saw
large flocks of Hwang-yang antelopes, but they disappear like white
clouds into space, and there is no chance of getting a shot at them.


                                                          _6th May._

By way of a change, and to spare my old pony Kwandu, whose turn it
was for duty, I walked the first stage, some sixteen miles or more,
to Ta Liang Ti. Two miles to the west of the road we passed the
Wang-ta-jên-Miao, the temple of his Excellency Wang, the burial-place
of a Mongol chieftain of that name, where, as the carter told me,
reside the officers in charge of an Imperial establishment for breeding
horses. A little excitement was added to the second half of the day
by our being warned of a band of “chi-ma-tseih,” horse brigands, who
infest the neighbourhood. The Mongols of a large encampment near Ta
Liang Ti have been waging war against them; yesterday they caught
four, the day before eight, all of whom will be sent to Chang Chia
Ko̔u for trial. The heads we saw yesterday belonged to four of their
troop. The ground is admirably adapted for their operations. The track
skirts a number of low hills, among which they hide, pouncing out upon
travellers who are too weak in numbers to offer resistance. The people
about are really panic-stricken, and no single cart ventures on the
road. An additional cause of fear is that these brigands are Shantung
men, who have the reputation of being very terrible. The deuce a tail
of a robber did we see, but we met a Mongol armed to the teeth and
carrying his long pole and rope for horse-catching—a most powerful
engine against a mounted robber—who asked me, in what the Mrs.
Malaprop of Peking used to call “broken china,” whether I had seen any
brigands, saying that he was one of a party out on the war-trail after
them. I could only wish him “good luck with his fishing.” We slept at
Ha Pa Chiao, where, as at Ta Liang Ti, the people were especially civil.


                                                          _7th May._

To-day we “received bitters unsurpassable,” as the Chinese say when
they come to grief—thirty-five miles’ ride at a foot-pace, for we
could not leave the baggage in a storm of wind, rain, thunder and
lightning, which regularly pursued us. The sandy soil was so heavy that
the cart-wheels could hardly turn; the horses were quite exhausted.
About two miles from Llama Miao, where the storm had lashed itself to
its greatest fury, we came to a small plateau surrounded by low hills.
Here we witnessed a phenomenon, new to me, and which I certainly never
wish to see again. The thunder, which seemed to circle round the hills,
roared savagely and cracked with deafening peals, while the lightning
ran along the ground criss-crossing in every direction until the
little plain was covered with a perfect network of blue liquid flames,
from the meshes of which escape seemed impossible. The effect on the
horses was indeed electric. Mine stood still and shivered with fear,
breaking out into a white lather of sweat, while the doctor’s, with
a scream, bolted madly into space, fortunately taking the direction
of the town. It was a weird scene, befitting a witch’s Sabbath. A
thunderstorm in Mongolia is indeed a trial to one’s nerves. To put the
finishing touch to our misery, when we arrived at Llama Miao drenched,
cold, and hungry, inn after inn refused to take us in, and we were for
near an hour riding through the wet streets, the people howling at us,
and a whole pack of curs yelping and snapping at our dogs. At last we
found an asylum in a large but wretched inn; the last tenants of the
rooms we occupied had been horses, and my bedroom was also used as a
cart-house. We were a good deal mobbed; a foreigner here is a _rara
avis_, and we created no small sensation, every dirty ragamuffin in the
place crowding into the yard. What excites the greatest astonishment is
that we are travelling for no business. To leave all one’s comforts
and ride four hundred miles for pleasure beats their comprehension, and
the Chinese are convinced that the barbarian has a bee in his bonnet.


                                                          _8th May._

Llama Miao is a large Chinese colony in the midst of a sandy desert,
four or five thousand feet above the level of the sea. The Mongols call
it Talonoru, which the Russians have softened into Dolonor. The Chinese
name, which means “llama’s temple,” is taken from two huge monasteries
of llamas, “the old temple” and “the new temple,” which stand by the
side of a small stream outside the town. They are rather villages than
temples, however, and contain, as the landlord and other natives told
me, several thousand llamas. We were unable to go into them, for the
river, swollen by the rain, was impassable; but we did not much regret
this, for all the temples have a strong family likeness, and we have
both had our fill of big Buddhas and dirty shaven monks with idiotic
faces (the llamas are by far the lowest type in China), out of whom
there is not even any information about their fraternity to be got,
for if you ask them some question touching their order, it is ten to
one that they will reply by another about your clothes. We contented
ourselves with a distant view of the Miao. In size, but in nothing
else, they reminded me of the Troitzkaia Lavra near Moscow, which is
also quite a small city.

The Mongols flock to Llama Miao to sell their horses, cattle, wool,
and raw hides to the Chinese, who, in return, supply them with corn
of all kinds, and such simple manufactured necessaries as the Mongols
require for their camps, at between three and four times Peking prices.
A measure of corn, which costs 100 cash in Peking, costs 3½ times that
amount here. This trade, for the landlord says there is no other, has
been sufficiently attractive to convert Llama Miao into a town, 6 li
(2 miles) long by 4 li (1⅓ mile) broad, and densely peopled. We passed
a dreary day, shivering in our fur coats. We saw no good horses for
sale, but one fine little gray pony, private property, was brought to
a farrier’s opposite, and bled in the street. I have since heard that
there is a great business done in bronze idols.


                                                          _9th May._

We had a better chance of seeing the town and horse-fair as we rode
through to-day. Yesterday the rain had made business dull, but to-day
there were hundreds of little horses for sale; their owners were
leading them about, strung together in packs, or galloping them madly
about, to show off their paces, to the great danger of the mob, and
especially of the small boys, who were scattered from under one horse’s
feet to another’s, but always escaped by a miracle. The show was bad
in quality, for the best horses are not brought in until the summer or
autumn. Our horses, from their superior grooming and feeding, were much
admired, but our saddlery received an ovation. “Ai ya!” said an old
Chinese horse-dealer, passing a dirty thumb over my saddle, “a man may
grow old in these parts over the border, and never see such a saddle as
that! Unsurpassable!” Besides the horsey gentlemen, there is a large
population of craftsmen, such as ropemakers, basketmakers, shoemakers,
and the like. With the exception of a few large well-built places of
business, which have even some pretension to ornamental architecture,
the houses are small and poor. Altogether, Llama Miao is not a place
worth a visit on its own account; we merely took it as a good point to
reach and turn back from. If it had not been for the fact that we were
riding back to Peking, I should not have been sorry to leave it.

We stopped at a small roadside inn for breakfast. The people were
such a contrast to the town-folk, who are always impertinent and
obstructive. The villagers are simple creatures, and so civil and
obliging. Sitting on a bench outside the inn was a very small boy,
dirty to a degree, but excessively pretty, feeding his younger brother
of three years old with a sort of macaroni, which he was stuffing down
his throat with chop-sticks; the father, a good-humoured countryman,
was sitting hard by, resting and smoking his pipe. I gave the little
fellow a sixpence, which he so sweetly made over to the younger child.
As I sat chatting with these people up rode a well-dressed Chinese,
followed by his servant also on horseback. He stopped, called for a cup
of tea, drank it, and went off without paying. I saw that my friends
loved him as a mouse does a cat, and asked who he was. He turned out
to be a customs officer. “A terrible fellow,” said one; “if travellers
don’t bribe him, he stops them, and takes their luggage, swearing that
they are smuggling.” The respect which the Chinese have for their
rulers is truly touching. Our charioteer made me promise to-day to give
him a pass from the Legation when we reach Peking, without which, and
perhaps in spite of which, he, being a countryman, would be mulcted at
the gate on his return home.

About twenty miles from Llama Miao, at a place called Shui-Hsien-Tszŭ,
the sandy plain ends, and the character of the scenery changes
completely.

The road winds down a steep ravine between hills and rocks of every
variety of shape; a tiny torrent follows the same line. There are a few
trees, leafless as yet, and here and there the lower hills are tilled.
Cottages are plentiful, and the number of travellers shows that we are
on the high-road to Peking. We passed the night at Kou Mên Tzŭ. The
people were as civil as possible, but very inquisitive, examining all
our belongings with childish curiosity. They were above all delighted
with my field-glass, through which they begged to be allowed to look.
They took the greatest care of it, and if any one was too eager the
others shouted, “Don’t snatch, don’t snatch.” It was given back to
me by the elder of the party, who said with the greatest gravity,
“Venerable teacher, you have opened our eyes,” and then proceeded to
lecture upon us for the benefit of a party of new-comers. “What are
you come to sell?” said one, interrupting the lecture. “Sell things!”
shouted my exhibitor indignantly; “what thing are you? He don’t sell
things; he’s an officer like our chih hsien!”—which office is promotion
for a brass-buttoned mandarin of a rank about equal to a parish beadle.
Popular enthusiasm reached its height when I pulled out an old number
of the _Saturday Review_ and began to read. I can now realise the
feelings of a giant in a caravan, travelling from place to place and
being shown wherever he goes.


                                                         _10th May._

Below Kou Mên Tzŭ runs a mountain stream, over which there is a rude
bridge supported on fascines filled with rubbish and loose stones. The
village, from the left bank of the river, looks very picturesque,
and there is a temple on the hillside that is a little gem in its
way. After ascending the river for some little distance we dived into
another mountain gorge, more beautiful and wild than that of yesterday.
The rocks are bolder and more striking, and the hillsides are covered
with a dwarf wild fruit tree bearing a pink flower as brilliant as the
wild rhododendron of the Alps. There are a few tender shoots, too,
on the stunted trees and shrubs, which, with the mosses and lichens
covering the different strata of rocks, add colour to the landscape.
As the road is a perpetual zigzag one is constantly coming upon fresh
surprises and new forms. To-day’s ride would have been perfect had it
not been for a storm of wind and sand which destroyed our pleasure. We
rested at Hung Tu̔ng Tien, and our abode for the night was at Lao Wo
Pu̔, a quiet little place, where the inn, which stands at a turn of
the road, is perfectly circled by hills, as if it were in a devil’s
punch-bowl. As we sat in the pretty inn-yard we agreed that in spite
of bad weather and cold (we had found ice in several places) we had
seldom enjoyed a day more. One advantage gained over our previous days
was that by loitering on the way and stopping to “sit a sit and rest
a rest” in different cottages, where we were always made welcome, we
managed to arrive at the inn after our servants instead of before. It
is such a bore having to look after the cleaning of the rooms and the
stabling of the horses in the midst of a gaping crowd of wonderers.


                                                         _11th May._

Descending the pass the valley widens; the mountain streamlet becomes
quite a river, which we have to cross over and over again; it is very
rapid, and at the fords the water reaches to the horses’ girths. The
ground here is carefully tilled, and well irrigated as it is, must
be fertile. I saw a jolly old couple cultivating their little field
together: the old man was painfully working out furrows with a hoe,
while his wife, stumping along on her small feet, sowed the seed out
of a wooden vessel, with a spout like a watering-pot, which she tapped
with a stick to let the grain fall out by degrees. I hope they may have
a good harvest. Our two resting-places were Kwa Ti Erh and Kwo Chia
Tu̔n, a large village with particularly disagreeable inhabitants,
whose practice it is to eat much garlic and then breathe in the face of
travellers. The sand-storm this afternoon was one of the worst I have
seen. It blinded us and threw a yellow pea-soup fog over scenery that
is as beautiful as mountains and river can make it.


                                                         _12th May._

We were warned last night to be on our guard and look out for brigands,
but nothing came of it. This morning we turned off into another pass
steering south-west. Here we had a change in the landscape, for the
hills were covered with trees and brushwood, showing more green as we
got farther south. The people cried wolf again about robbers, but they
do not seem to fancy attacking Europeans; the bore of it is that we
are bound to do escort duty and stick to the cart, which would not be
safe without us and our revolvers. The Chinese are in mortal terror
of them, so a bumbailiff from the Chih-hsien’s yamên at Fêng Ming
Hsien begged us to let him travel with us for company and protection.
He had been all the way to Kou Mên Tzŭ on foot to claim a debt of
six taels (£2). He told me he was between fifty and sixty years old,
and had been a confirmed opium-smoker for twenty years and more,
smoking regularly twice a day, once after each meal. He was as hale
and hearty as need be, walking his thirty miles a day with a heavy
pack on his back, for, with an eye to the main chance, he was going to
combine with his official business a little peddling trade on his own
account—a fresh proof that opium if not taken in large quantities is
not so enervating after all. As for its effect on the mind, some of the
cleverest Chinese are habitual smokers. I must say that I have never
seen anything which bears the faintest resemblance to the horrors of
opium-smoking described in books. This man told me that opium still
gave him delicious dreams, but said he regretfully, “It’s all folly,
they never come true.” Our first fifteen miles lay along very broken
ground—terrible work for the horses—but so picturesque, that if any
brigands had appeared I should have expected them to come out decked
in ribands and tall hats like Mr. Tupman. A common crowd of Chinese
ragamuffins would have been sadly out of tune. One descent that we
had to make was so abrupt that I fully expected our heavy baggage-cart
to come down with a run; however, the carter showed his ingenuity,
and improvised a drag with a huge log of wood which he lashed behind
the cart, fastening it to the axletree with a tourniquet; this made
an effective but not very lasting break; as the wheels wore through
the wood he tightened the tourniquet, and so brought the cart safe to
the bottom. From the top of the pass we had a magnificent panorama of
mountains, range rising above range, north and south, in huge fantastic
masses, with dark foreground and melting blue distances. Beneath us
to the south lay a little hill-girt valley green with young wheat and
trees almost in full leaf, a little Eden in the wilderness. At the
farther end of this valley is a pretty hamlet called Niu Chuên Tzŭ,
where we breakfasted in a clean, tidy inn. We had now travelled over
a hundred miles through narrow mountain passes, but soon after we had
left Niu Chuên Tzŭ our road opened out into a valley so broad as to
be almost a plain. The sun was setting and lighting up the mountains
that separated us from China as we rode into Fêng Ming Hsien, a
pleasant town to look at, but to us very inhospitable; the best inns
rejected us, and we were so mobbed and persecuted after we had found a
resting-place, that I was obliged to appeal to the executive to get the
inn-yard cleared. The executive made its appearance in the shape of a
large and very dirty gentleman with an unkept tail, who by dint of a
deal of threatening and bad language procured for us peace and quiet.


                                                         _13th May._

Of course, because our inn was particularly dirty and bad, the
innkeeper was proportionately extortionate. He was evidently a bad
character and rather fallen in the world, and had taken us in, in spite
of prejudices which he shared with the rest of his fellow-townsmen,
in order to make a profit out of us. We were glad to be quit of him,
the inn, and the town. Our mid-day halt was at a very different sort
of place, a little village called Shou Hu Ying, which takes its name
from a tradition that the famous Emperor, Káng Hsi, once came here
a-hunting, and killed a tiger on the spot where the village now
stands. There was only one inn, humble enough, but very clean, and a
few pots of flowers in the principal room gave it an air of smartness.
The guest-room also served as village school, of which all the
paraphernalia were scattered about. There was the magisterial chair and
scholars’ stools covered with bits of felt or sheep-skin,—more luxury
than we had at Eton,—well-thumbed copies of the San-tzŭ-ching,—three
character classic,—the Chinese boy’s primer, a few cheap
writing-materials, and a copy-book in which some little urchin had been
making laborious attempts at copying the numerals and other simple
characters. By way of ornament there was a picture of four little boys
representing the seasons, dancing round a basket of impossible flowers
with the most grotesque contortions, with the superscription, “The
four seasons when prosperous beget riches.” In the cause of letters it
was satisfactory to know that we were not interrupting studies, for
the dominie had given himself and the boys a holiday, and had betaken
himself to a fair at the neighbouring village of Po Li Nao, in order to
go to the theatre. It is very funny to hear a class of little fellows
droning out the classics, of which they don’t understand a word,
in chorus, the tones of the language making a sort of cadence. The
system of teaching a boy a lot of characters without their sense, each
character simply representing a meaningless sound to him, could only
exist in China. We passed Po Li Nao, some fifteen li farther on, and to
the great astonishment of the sightseers did not stop to hear a play by
a troupe of poor strollers. “What! been to Po Li Nao and didn’t go to
see the theatre! Ai ya! that’s strange!” said a footpad of whom I asked
the way. At any rate we saw what was better, Po Li Nao itself, one of
the most picturesquely situated little places I have seen in China. It
stands at the foot of a bend of low hills, above which rises a towering
range of dark, jagged peaks, and beside it winds a clear pebbly stream,
breaking here and there against large stones; add to this a few quaint
Chinese buildings, plenty of trees, and all the bustle of the fair. We
had a difficult sandy track again for the heavy cart; we were 13½ hours
on the road, stopped two hours at noon, and only accomplished about
thirty miles. We put up at Kwa Yo Erh, where, as at all small places,
the people were civility itself, our landlord even turning his family
out of his own house in order to lodge us comfortably.


                                                         _14th May._

We took care that our host, who combined the profession of military
officer with that of innkeeper, should not lose by his civility, and
we parted with mutual expressions of goodwill. We had a climb of it up
a steepish hill, on the top of which is a temple to the god of war,
and then descended on to the valley of Ku Pei Ko̔u by a winding road
cut in stages over a precipice such as one finds on a large scale in
Switzerland and the Tyrol. More than once on our journey through these
mountains I have been put in mind of the Alps, not only by the scenery
which, if it were not for the absence of snow and glaciers, would stand
the comparison well, but also by the goitres and cretinism which seem
to be the curse of mountainous districts. The other day at a cross-road
I asked the way of a man who was collecting dung for fuel; he turned
round and said very simply, “I know nothing, I’m only an idiot; ask
him,” pointing to a man ploughing, “he knows everything.” Deafness,
too, seems rather common, probably owing to the very hard weather which
prevails during some seven months of the year. The old people seem
hearty enough, barring their hearing. I came across none of a very
advanced age, but one old fellow of seventy-nine was very hearty, and
to all appearance likely to remain so, but he was by many years the
_doyen_ of all I met, and anything past seventy seems to be looked upon
as extraordinary.

We had a scorching ride to-day: there was a good deal of electricity in
the air, which told upon us when we had been some hours in the saddle.
As we were a full hour ahead of our baggage we turned the horses to
graze, and sat down by a brook to smoke a cigar. As luck would have
it we had no matches; however, there was a house not far off, so the
doctor volunteered to go and beg a light. On arriving at the cottage
he found forty or fifty people engaged in a “white affair,” which is
the euphemism for a funeral, because white is the colour of mourning. A
dozen or so of the relations, friends, and neighbours were seated round
a bier weeping and crooning officially, while the others, waiting
till their turn came for grief, were smoking their pipes and retailing
country gossip. They were very civil, and presently—for apparently the
attraction of seeing the foreigners was superior to that of mourning
by commission for a poor old woman—all, except those actually on duty
round the coffin, were crowding about us as merry as possible; even
the women with their heads bound up in white cloth as if they had
the face-ache turned out to have a peep at us from behind the house,
grinning and giggling as if they were assisting at a marriage.

We did not go into the town of Ku Pei Ko̔u, but stopped at an inn just
outside the gates; so we had all the advantage of the fine view over
the Great Wall of China, with pure air to breathe, instead of the
garlic and muck-stained atmosphere of the town.

During the whole of our journey from Llama Miao to Ku Pei Ko̔u we did
not see a single Mongol, much less a camp. The ground is not suited
to their nomad and pastoral habits; it is colonised exclusively by
Chinese, principally farmers from the province of Shantung. Europeans
have very rarely followed this route; so far as I can make out they
have been seen here once, or at most twice.


                                                         _15th May._

This day week we were shivering in furs at Llama Miao. To-day a gauze
shirt was too much; the flies were a perfect pest. It was too hot to
do anything but sleep, which they put out of the question. It was not
until after dinner that we could venture out. We went up a hill behind
the inn, from which we had a fine view of the sun setting behind the
heights which the Great Wall scales. In the valley beneath wayfarers
were hurrying to reach the town before the closing of the gates;
the rear was brought up by a herd of about a hundred pigs, the last
travellers who entered China this night by the gates of Ku Pei Ko̔u.

About Ku Pei Ko̔u and the road back to Peking I wrote to you last year,
and this letter is too long already. Three days brought us home to the
Legation.

_P.S._—By the bye, although the part of Mongolia we visited is set down
on the maps as belonging to the province of Chi Li, which it is so far
as its government is concerned, I have spoken of _China_ as bounded by
the Great Wall. No Mongol living beyond it would consider himself as
an inhabitant of China, and the Chinese themselves speak of the places
which are “Ko̔u-wai,” outside the mouth or frontier, as Mongolia. In
Stamford’s large map of China and Japan you will see how Chang Chia
Ko̔u, Dolonor or Llama Miao, and Ku Pei Ko̔u are placed—some of our
other halting-places are also given, but you would hardly recognise
them from their spelling.


_May 20th—Sunday._—Went round some of the curiosity shops, where I was
shown, among other things, a wonderful ewer and cover of rock crystal,
about a foot high. I have seen nothing finer of its kind than the
carving. In the days of Chien Lung the Magnificent, himself a great
patron of art, when a fine piece of rock crystal, jade, or cornelian
was brought in from the western mountains as tribute, a committee of
taste decided the shape to be given to it, and fixed upon the artist to
whom it should be entrusted by Imperial Command.

_May 21._—The pious Chinese are all off these days making a pilgrimage
to a holy shrine among the hills, called Miao Fêng Shan, to burn
joss-stick as a sovereign prophylactic against disease and misfortune
of all kinds.

_May 22._—The thermometer standing at 100° in the shade. The heat
frightfully oppressive. Happily on the following day there came a great
thunderstorm, with hailstones as big as pigeon’s eggs. This cooled
the air. The formation of the hailstones was curious: a nodule of ice
surrounded by a coating of frozen snow, which in its turn was encased
in ice. Bad for heads!

_May 27._—An outbreak of the “Heavenly Flowers,” or smallpox, causes
general consternation and vaccination. Any one who is opposed to
vaccination had better see the ravages of this horrible disease in
an Eastern city; so common is it that no Chinaman who has not “put
forth the heavenly flowers” is considered quite complete. It is like
distemper with dogs in Europe.

_May 29._—Dined with Dr. and Mrs. Wells Williams at the American
Legation, a handsome and delightful couple now entering middle age.
Dr. Williams, the author of a Chinese dictionary, and that most
encyclopædic book _The Middle Kingdom_, is one of the most learned
of sinologues. He began his career in China as a missionary in the
south, but his great talents rendered him necessary to the American
Government, and he is now _chargé d’affaires_ here. He was very
interesting, talking, among other subjects, on the paper currency.
Bank-notes, it seems, were first introduced in the days of the Sung
dynasty, during the reign of Shao Hsing (A.D. 1170). At that time
copper was scarce, so the Government issued great notes (Ta Chao) of
the value of 1000 to 5000 copper cash, and small notes (Hsiao Chao)
worth from 100 to 700 cash. Officers were appointed everywhere to issue
and receive these notes. They were to be renewed within seven years,
and fifteen cash in every thousand were deducted for the expense of
making them. They were said to be “kung ssŭ pien,” “convenient both for
the public and for private individuals.” Marco Polo mentions them with
praise.

_June 1._—My new colleague, Sir Eric Farquhar, arrived from England.
An old schoolfellow. He was accompanied by Mr. Brenchley, a most
accomplished traveller, who seems to have been all over the world, and
being a great naturalist and profound observer, is a charming companion
to boot.

_June 10._—The last few days have been occupied in showing Brenchley
the lions of Peking. To-day we went to breakfast at a fashionable
Chinese restaurant, “The House of Eternal Prosperity,” in the Ta Shih
La Erh, which we call Curio Street. In order that we might make a
genteel appearance and observe the ten thousand proprieties, my servant
Chang Hsi insisted on our going in carts. Walking is so vulgar! We were
jolted and bruised over the indescribable ruts and paving-stones to a
horrible degree, but our dignity was kept up. We found the House of
Eternal Prosperity very shabby and dirty, and we should have had a much
better breakfast at home.

_June 15–20._—Two more parties of travellers arrived. More work as
“intelligent guide.”




                              LETTER XXVII


                                                TA-CHIO-SSŬ,
                                         THE TEMPLE OF GREAT REPOSE,
                                             _23rd July 1866_.

The last mail took you no letter from me because I was far away in
Mongolia. My first intention had been merely to go as far as Chang
Chia Ko̔u, to accompany Brenchley and make the arrangements for his
journey across Siberia to Russia. Ultimately, however, the party
increased to four, of whom one was a lady, and our programme grew in
proportion. We started on June the 21st. We were detained four or five
days at Chang Chia Ko̔u, owing to the chicanery of a faithless Mongol
camel-owner who did not keep faith with us. However, it is a bright,
cheerful little town, so I did not much mind. It was gayer than ever
too, for on account of the great drought, morning, noon, and night,
the town was being paraded by processions of distressed agriculturists
praying for rain. Preceded by squeaky clarionets, drums, and gongs,
a crowd of men and boys with wreaths of willow round their heads and
middles, above which their sunburnt bodies were naked, some wearing
fillets of red paper, others doing penance with their necks enclosed
in the heavy board used as a punishment for prisoners, escorted a
sedan chair with a tiny god in it to the Lung Wang Miao, the Temple of
the Dragon Prince, whom, being a water-god, it is well to propitiate
in cases of drought.[16] Some of the votaries were armed with spears
and rude guns, which from time to time they fired off, and altogether
there was din and clatter enough even to please a Chinese crowd. “Ah!
these agriculturists!” said a Chinese gentleman who was looking on
with the most supreme contempt, and whom I asked for an explanation
of the affair; “they are never content! It’s always too much rain or
too little, or something the matter. Unsurpassable!” The prayers of
the worthy people were heard, however, and the Dragon Prince took a
favourable view of their case, for the first day of my stay at Chang
Chia Ko̔u there came a thunderstorm, with a downfall of rain, such as
one seldom sees out of the tropics, and there was more or less rain all
the time we were there. The coincidence will not improve the chances
of an American missionary who has been physicking the natives of Chang
Chia Ko̔u for rather more than a year, but in spite of the drastic
arguments of blue pill and black dose, has not yet made a convert.

There are three main passes leading from China into Mongolia, Chang
Chia Ko̔u, Ku Pei Ko̔u, and between them Tu Shih Ko̔u, which is
smaller and less important, but which I had not seen. The plan which I
proposed, and which my companions accepted, was to make a tour of the
three, following a line outside, but in some parts parallel with the
Great Wall.

We left Chang Chia Ko̔u on the 30th of June. It was frightfully hot,
but I had provided a refuge against the scorching sun, which at
mid-day would have been unbearable. We each had with us a mule litter,
a sort of long carriage in which a single person can almost lie at full
length, with shafts behind and before which are borne on mules’ backs.
This sounds rather a comfortable and luxurious way of travelling,
seeing that one’s bed and pillows are placed inside. As a fact it is
horridly jolty and sea-sicky; then no sooner has one established one’s
self in a tolerably easy position and dozed off (which is inevitable,
and makes one very hot and uncomfortable), than one is called upon by
the muleteer to trim the boat: “Your Excellency! please sit a little
more to the south. Your Excellency’s weight is all to the north!
The north side of that mule’s back is becoming terribly galled.” My
muleteer was a very original character. He had a prodigious talent for
screaming out Chinese anacreontics at the top of his voice, and for
dramatic recitations and imitations of popular actors. He was always
the last of the muleteers to get up in the morning, and when at last I
took to waking him with the crack of a hunting-whip, he only grumbled
good-humouredly and said the “old lord,” meaning me, was very hard
upon him, but none the more did he get up to feed his mules. He had
been to Mongolia once with Sir Frederic Bruce, to whom he applied the
most glowing eulogy that a Chinaman can bestow, holding up his thumb;
words could go no further. Altogether Cha Mai Chu—that is his name—was
the merriest, grinningest, and most laughable devil that I have ever
come across here. When we arrived at the inn, and the six muleteers,
having acquiesced in the landlord’s civil proposal, “You six gentlemen”
(if you could but see the six gentlemen!) “will dine together, I
suppose,” had sat down to the coarse fare, a sort of macaroni with
garlic and pickles, which they allow themselves, Cha Mai Chu used to
keep the other five in a roar of laughter, and I rather think that
by that means he contrived to suck up the lion’s share of the white
strings.

As the first part of our road, as far as Chang-Ma-Tzŭ-Chin, was but
a repetition of the same journey which I wrote about in my last
long letter describing my expedition to Llama Miao, I spare you the
repetition. Farther on we followed a route new to me, and in some
places not visited before by foreigners. This may interest you. After
leaving Chang-Ma-Tzŭ-Chin on the 3rd July, instead of pushing on
northwards across Mongolia, which at this season is far more worthy
of its Chinese name, “The Land of Grass,” than it was two months
ago, we steered south-east back towards China, across a sandy plain,
richly cultivated with potatoes and other crops. In the midst of this
sandy tract stands a little tumble-down Chinese village called Lien
Hwa Tan, “the lotus-flower fountain,” from an old tradition that
there once stood there a temple in which was a fountain flourishing
with lotus-flowers. Now it is a case of _lucus a non_, for temple,
fountain, and flowers have all faded away together, and as for anything
flourishing, there was barely a roof for us to eat our breakfasts
under. We were making for a ridge of green hills, from the top of which
I expected to come in sight of the Great Wall, which, however, did not
appear until we had reached the bottom of an emerald-green valley,
with luxuriant vegetation, lying between rugged and bare rocks. Hard
by Tu Shih Ko̔u the great brick monster showed itself again, but in
ruins, undermined and sapped by continual watercourses. The rocks here
are very fine, picturesque and astonishing in their shapes. Tu Shih
Ko̔u itself is a queer little old town. The fortifications and walls
are falling into decay, uncared for and unrepaired. In a few years, I
should think, its quaint gables and towers and useless fortifications
will have crumbled away; but on the other hand, inside the walls there
are shops, neat and tidy, and houses showing signs of some prosperity.
Perhaps, after all, there is some method in the apparent madness of
letting the old remains of protection against border warfare go to
the dogs. I have often told you how bothered travellers are here on
arriving at an inn by gapers and starers. The nuisance was multiplied
a hundred-fold on this excursion by the fact of our having a lady
with us. I was armed with special letters of recommendation from the
Ministers of Foreign Affairs to the high mandarins along the road, and
as soon as these last heard that we were annoyed, they hastened to send
us “po-po” (sweetmeats) and protection, but before this arrived I had
been obliged to take the law into my own hands, for three dirty, old,
gray blackguards had actually, using their wet thumbs as centre-bits,
made holes in one of our paper windows, at which they were playing
peeping Tom, and so interested by what they saw that they did not
hear Retribution stealing up on tiptoe armed with a hunting-whip.
Retribution, that is myself, tied their three nasty old tails together
and packed them off howling, to the great delight of their friends and
relations, who quite recognised the breach of Tao Li of which they had
been guilty. An appeal to Tao Li, good manners, or propriety, is always
a trump card to play when in difficulties with a Chinese crowd.

We only stayed one night at Tu Shih Ko̔u, and then rode back through
another pass to the fresh air of the steppe. We passed the night at
a little hamlet called Chang Leang. There was but one inn, and that
was full, and we should have had to pass the night _al fresco_ if a
good-natured Bachelor of Arts returning from Llama Miao to Tu Shih Ko̔u
had not consented to push on and give us up his room for the lady of
our party. The rest of us managed to huddle up somehow. Never in all my
wanderings here have I had to sleep in such queer places as I did on
this journey. The villages were poor, the inns worse; and instead of
having the high place, we males were bound to put up with holes such
as the very beggars in England would back out of. However, the game was
worth the candle so far as scenery was concerned, and then the air of
Mongolia makes up for everything. Even the Alpine Club do not know what
fresh air is; they must come to the steppes.

The next day we breakfasted at a felt manufactory, at a village called
Ta Tan. The way the Chinese make their felt is very rude and primitive,
but the result beats Manchester and cogwheels. A quantity of wool
is carded and weighed and scattered evenly over a rush mat. When a
sufficient quantity has been laid, the wool is carefully flattened
down with a sort of wickerwork fan and sprinkled with boiling water;
the mat and wool are then rolled up and tied, and the roll being laid
on the ground is kicked backwards and forwards by six men from foot
to foot for five minutes. A second layer completes the felt, which is
excellent. I wish I could give you an idea of the extreme beauty of
our afternoon’s ride. After we had left our felt manufactory, the road
lay through low hills, along a valley that was perfectly enamelled
with wild-flowers, principally yellow ones, a real blaze of gold—wild
roses, ranunculus, amaryllis, peony, daphne, potentilla, pinks, purple
iris, gorgeous tiger and Turk’s cap lilies, and poppies which pay the
Emperor of China the compliment of wearing his colours, besides a host
of others—a mass of beauties. A violent contrast to the richness of the
pasture are the herds of camels, who at this time of year, coatless,
mangy, emaciated, and so weak as hardly to be able to move along, are
turned out to get rid of the sores on their backs and recruit for
their hard work in autumn, winter, and spring. Poor brutes! pitiable
as they look, this must be the happiest season of their year; they
well earn their rest. Along this wild garden we gradually ascended—so
gradually that it was not until we had reached the top of the pass
that opens out between two rocks on a panorama of high hills, range
upon range lying at our feet, that we had any idea how high we were.
I think this view as I saw it, with the sun setting in the distance
and the remains of a storm rolling away over the mountains, is one
of the finest I have ever seen. The mountains themselves are savage
and barren, and in the valleys clusters of trees mark where Chinese
homesteads stand, so poor that not even eggs are to be bought there.
In one of these, at a place called Pa Ti, half farmhouse, half inn, we
slept, I in a sort of barn, my bed on the ground, my dressing-table a
nether millstone, and my washhand-stand the carcase of an old cart. The
sun was rising when we started down the valley, which really is the
grandest thing I have seen in China, and barring the attractions of
snow and ice, it seems to me the Alps have nothing finer to show. Rocks
more grim and uncouth there cannot be. They take every conceivable
shape—men’s heads, tigers, lions, citadels with turrets and battlements
of living rock, are easily conjured up. Then there are huge boulders
that look as if a breath would blow them down, so delicately are they
poised upon points apparently quite unfit to bear their weight. It is
a valley which makes one think of old fairy tales about giants and
dwarfs and ogres’ castles. The poor commonplace Chinese drudges who
inhabit it are ill-suited to their home. The best part of the scenery
ends some fifteen miles down the valley, at a hill called Llama Shan
(“The Llama’s Hills”)—two enormous pyramidical rocks, at the foot of
which is a village to which they give their name. On one rock, high
upon a flat surface hard to climb to, is painted a rude picture of
Buddha, with a glory round his head and his finger and thumb held up
in orthodox form. The painting is of old date, but pious hands have
recently restored it. In the other rock is a cave in which a rather
hazy tradition says that in old times a llama or llamas used to retire
from the world, and pass their time in the pious contemplation of their
own navels. Their reverences showed their taste in the choice of their
abode, for it is a lovely spot. We were spoilt for the lower half of
the valley by the beauty of the upper half, but we had still before us
a fine jagged hill, at the foot of which is Ta Kao, our halting-place,
a largish town, rich in gardens. And what would Exeter Hall say if it
heard that there are places in these parts which actually cultivate
their own poppies? We found a famous inn at Ta Kao, with large rooms
freshly papered; but strange to say, on the 6th of July, the stove-beds
or kangs were all heated. We, coming from the cool mountain breezes,
found the atmosphere of itself close and stuffy, though in comparison
with Peking it was freshness itself; the heated kangs were perfectly
insupportable. We wound up a long day with the usual exhibition to a
rather tiresome crowd.

We travelled next day along a poverty-stricken but picturesque valley,
through which flows a mountain torrent swelled almost to a river by
the recent rains. We had to ford it twenty-two times in the course
of the day. At one ford one of the mule litters broke down and was
smashed to pieces. No great damage was done, and the mule litter was
patched together with bits of string and an old nail or two. The way
in which the muleteer abused his beasts for the mishap was very funny.
Treating the mule as if it had been a human creature, he proceeded
in his wrath to take away its younger sister’s character. Be it man
or mule, horse or pig, or what not, that sins against a Chinese, he
immediately tramples on the fair fame of the younger sister of the
offender, heaping upon her every foul abuse that he can lay his tongue
to. Mingled with his revilings, the muleteer addressed the most humble
petitions to me not to dock his pay, passing from prayer to abuse with
wondrous facility. If that mule’s younger sister was guilty of one-half
the enormities ascribed to her, the punishment has not yet been devised
which would be equal to the occasion. The list of her crimes is not
fit for publication. When we arrived at Chai Ling the only room that I
could have was perfectly untenable from stuffiness and a hot kang which
took up a good half of it, so I slept in my litter in the inn-yard,
_sub Jove_, which was very cool and pleasant.

The following morning, 8th July, we were awakened by a most glorious
sunrise; it was so fresh and nice that I walked the greater part
of the day’s journey, to the undisguised wonder of the muleteers,
who could not in the least understand it. They hold up their thumbs
in admiration, and loudly express their high respect for such
prowess. “See the old lord! how he walks!” “He has obtained to walk
unsurpassably.” “This body! Our lords here have not such bodies!”
It was but a ten-mile walk; but no Chinese gentleman would dream of
attempting such a feat. We all went beetle-mad this day, one of our
party being an entomologist. Under one jujube-tree we found so many
varieties of insects of different kinds that it became perfectly
exciting; even the muleteers caught the fever and began to take a
certain interest in the hunt, but were rather afraid of the quarry. At
the end of a very pretty mountain walk we found the “Inn of Flourishing
Righteousness,” with a large yard full of picturesque groups of
half-naked drovers and muleteers. We were well lodged and very
comfortable.

The next morning we came down the pass on to Ku Pei Ko̔u, which I
found as attractive as ever. I put up at my old quarters outside the
town. Of course we rested a day to let the travellers have a ramble
on the Great Wall. While they were busy picking up bricks and ferns
and other souvenirs of the Great Wall, I fell in with a curious
character. He was an old Chinaman, by name Li, by trade a herbalist
and naturalist, by adoption a poultry-fancier, and by inspiration a
professor of palmistry. He began by telling me a lot of curious facts
and properties about different plants and roots, but as their English
names were unknown to me I cannot repeat them. Certain of them were to
cure the hot, others to repel the cold influence. Lizards he pointed
to as a deadly poison (internal) to horses and cattle. After he had
discoursed to me some time, he asked to look at my hand; and then he
really surprised me. He told me things about myself and family which
are certainly known to few people but ourselves; that they should have
become known to a poor cottager living on a hillside near a little
out-of-the-way town at the farther extremity of Asia is impossible.
We shall see if what he said about the future is equally correct. The
lines in the hand from which he gathered his auguries were different
from those which used to be read in Europe; he explained his science
to me, but as he did so in verse, and in the jargon of the trade, I
could not make much of it. He invited me afterwards to his cottage—such
a pretty little spot, with a glorious vine trained so as to make a
covered Pergola in front of it. He passes his life here contentedly,
seldom going to the town but when he needs to sell his herbs or his
chickens. As soon as he made his appearance with me a whole pack of
dirty little brats, all stark naked, came trooping out to welcome him
and salute their father’s guest according to manners.

I had hoped to have pushed so far as Jo Hol, the imperial palace and
hunting forest, but one of my companions struck work, and I was obliged
to return to Peking, having been within two days of my goal, which I
hope, however, to reach another time.




                             LETTER XXVIII


                                     TA-CHIO-SSŬ, _4th August 1866_.

When I returned from Mongolia three weeks ago I found that all the
world, that is to say, the three or four diplomatists who compose
our world, had very wisely taken itself off to the country. So early
as last February I had secured this “Temple of Great Repose,” and I
lost no time in coming out here. It is too far from Peking to be very
convenient; but it is well worth the extra ride, and the advantage
of being fifteen miles from the other temples inhabited by Europeans
is incalculable; one is not subject to perpetual interruptions by
people who, being bored themselves, come in and inflict their boredom
upon others. It is a great undertaking moving out to the hills. We
are obliged to take absolutely our whole _ménage_, and almost all our
furniture with us. I think you would have laughed at my procession;
there were fourteen carts full of every kind of movable—our whole
poultry-yard clucking and cackling out of coops and baskets, and a cow
with her calf. This must seem strange to you, who would certainly not
dream of taking your hens, ducks, and cows with you from town to the
country: it is only another instance of the universal topsy-turviness
of things in China, again demonstrated by the fact that the farther one
gets from town the dearer everything becomes, there being no market and
no competition, so that the owner of a leg of mutton can just charge
what he pleases for it, knowing that you must either buy at his price
or go without it altogether. It is a beautiful ride out here, past
Hai Tien, a little village with a smart inn at which the Pekingese
may be seen by scores, naked to the waist, and enjoying an outing,
after their fashion, with chopsticks and rice, tea and infinitesimal
pipes, past Yuen Ming Yuen and Wan Shao Shan, or rather its ruins,
past flourishing cornfields and picturesque hamlets, past temples and
shrines innumerable, along stony roads which the rains have turned into
canals so deep that the carters are obliged to cast lots for which
shall strip his very dirty body and go in to see whether the carts can
pass or not. It was quite dark before I reached the temple, after eight
hours’ ride under the hottest sun I ever remember to have felt. Indeed
I had a sad proof of its strength the next day, for my brown pony,
Hop-o’-my-thumb, who had carried me so well over so many hundred miles,
died of sunstroke after a few hours’ illness. Poor little beast! He was
a great pet, and as fond of me as a dog. When I went down to his stable
shortly before he died he put his head on my shoulder and looked so
piteously in my face. The Chinese veterinary surgeon (they are rather
clever at that) declares that he was struck by the sun the day before
while he was being led. He was the strongest, stoutest little beast you
ever saw, never sick nor sorry, and used to trot into Peking after a
700-mile journey as if he had just been out for a morning’s exercise.
He is the third horse that I have lost from one cause or another since
last September. Bad luck, is it not?

This is certainly the prettiest temple and the most charming summer
residence that I have seen near Peking. The temple stands in a nest
of trees—cedars, pines, firs, and poplars—a perpetual fountain runs
through all its courts, and there seems always to be a cool breeze
blowing. While our friends are complaining of being roasted and baked
in their temples, we here are revelling in fresh air. Here is a
translation of an account of Ta Chio Ssŭ by a Chinese gentleman:—

“Seventy li (23 miles) from the walls of Peking there stood in the
time of the Liao a temple called Ling Chuan Ssŭ, ‘The temple of the
Spiritual Fountain.’ In the reign of the Emperor Hsuan Tê of the Ming
dynasty it was restored, and the name changed to Ta Chio Ssŭ, ‘The
temple of Great Repose.’ There are four shrines: the first is to the
Prince of heaven; the second to Ju Lai Fo, the Buddha who reigns in the
western heaven; the third to the Yo Shih Fo, the Buddha who presides
over medicine; and the fourth and last shrine has an upper story, and
in it is the Pu-sa (god of the second class) of Great Compassion.
Behind the shrines is a pond with a fountain. In this is a dragon’s
head carved in stone, out of the mouth of which the spring issues. In
front of the pond is a pagoda, on the left and right hands of which
are old fir-trees, one on each side, about which an old tradition
says that they never can overtop the pagoda, hence the spot is called
‘Sung ta chi,’ or ‘The firs and pagoda level.’ Besides this, outside
the shrine of the Prince of heaven, on either side there is a stone
called the dragon stone and the tiger stone, from their resemblance
to those animals. In front of these there is a stone bridge with a
pond of water on each side, and in the ponds there are a fountain and
lotus flowers and gold fish. By the side of the ponds is a dragon’s
claw tree, in the shape of lions playing, whence it is called the Lion
Tree. The temple is built on the west, facing the east; on its south
side is an imperial residence called Ssŭ Yi Tang, ‘The Hall of the Four
Proprieties.’ In the hall stands an imperial throne. In the garden are
four trees—peonies and two Yu Lan Hwa trees, magnolias. Behind this
hall is the ‘Pavilion of the Reposing Clouds,’ ‘Chi Yün Hsuan,’ in
front of which are bright bamboos and dark green firs interlaced like
a forest, a capital refuge from the heat in midsummer, with plenty to
see.”

My friend Liu, who wrote the description which I have translated
above, has left out one of the greatest charms of the place. Just
behind the “Pavilion of the Reposing Clouds,” in which we live, is a
most beautiful rock work, all covered with tufts of feathery grass,
mosses, and ferns, and lycopods: down this and into an artificial
basin, which is screened from the sun by a network of fir branches,
comes tumbling a deliciously cool fountain scented with pine needles,
which gives us a famous shower-bath twice a day—a real luxury. Close
by my fountain is a little summer-house, in which the Emperor Chien
Lung was transacting business one day with his ministers, and feeling
inspired by the influence of the place got through his work greatly to
his satisfaction, so he called the summer-house “The Pavilion of the
Understanding of Important Matters.” I wonder whether I have given you
an idea of what a very pretty place this is? It is almost enough to
tempt a man to turn Buddhist priest, and abstracting himself from the
unrealities of this life, pass his hour on earth in reflecting upon the
beauties of the hopelessly unattainable Nirvana (I don’t suppose you
know what that is—so much the better. It will be like that “blessed
word Mesopotamia” to the old woman at church). The only pity is that
mosquitoes and sand-flies sound such a lively recall to the reality of
the disagreeable.

The monastery is richly endowed with lands, so much so as to be
independent of the assistance from Government, to which, as an imperial
temple, it would be entitled. The place looks richer than most of the
temples about here. There is no magnificence, but it has a comfortable,
well-to-do appearance, the grounds and buildings being properly kept
up. All over the gardens there are notices to “relations and friends”
who may visit the temple to abstain from damaging buildings and trees,
plucking flowers or cutting down the bamboos, a notice the spirit of
which, as it says, “all respectable persons will observe of their own
accord, and those who do not will be fined.” First and last, monks and
laymen, there are some fifty persons employed about the temple. The
abbot himself finds it dull, so he remains at Peking enjoying himself.
His second in command is a charming monk, very clean in his person
and especially natty about his boots. He is very intelligent, too,
and comes and sits with me by the hour talking Buddhism. This is an
extremely religious temple—prayers, liturgies, drum and gong beating,
seem to be going on very constantly. But except on the 1st and 15th of
every moon and other holidays the novices are put on active service,
the monks enjoying an unbroken idleness; they are apparently cursed
with an unquenchable thirst, but as a fountain of perennial tea flows
for them they are not to be pitied. I suppose you would ask the name
of my friend with the neat boots; this would be an arch mistake and
violation of good-breeding on your part. When a man shaves his tail
and turns monk he cuts himself off from the whole world, including his
family, whose name even he no longer bears. To remind him of this would
be quite ill-bred, but as it is inconvenient that a monk—who, however
much he may renounce the vanities of this life, must occasionally be
brought in contact with that extremely unreal idea, the world—should
have no designation at all, he adopts two words or characters as his
appellation, which on no account must you call his name. You ask him
what is his “honourable above and below”; this refers to the two
characters, one of which is written above the other. My friend’s
“honourable above and below” is Fo Kwo. As a Buddhist monk must not be
asked his name, so a Taoist monk must not be asked his age, although it
is one of the complimentary routine questions in China.

The neighbourhood round about here is as charming as the place itself.
The fields are richly cultivated; there is plenty of hedge-row timber,
and the villages are very picturesque and well shaded. The hills are
beautifully shaped, and take fine colours of an evening. The one
thing wanting is water, which is missing all over this part of China.
Nothing can be prettier than the cottages of the villagers with their
long, low eaves; each has its little garden hedged in by a fence of
tall millet, over which are trained gourds and other creepers. There
is generally, too, a millet-straw shed with a vine creeping about it,
and under this the labourers sit of an evening and drink their tea,
a picture of contentment. The temples, both Taoist and Buddhist, are
numerous. Yesterday I scrambled up to a very pretty one on the top of
a great eminence so steep that it is called by the Chinese the “Wall
Mountain.” I found a most charming little monastery built in tiers, I
should have said terraces had it not been so tiny, which reminded me
of the tiers of the Rhenish vineyards. Their reverences the monks had
all gone off to Peking on a lark, but I was hospitably entertained with
tea by two lay attendants, for whose benefit I in return emptied my
cigar-case. What a queer existence these people lead perched up on the
top of a high hill! They are so stay-at-home that they hardly seem to
care even to go down on to the plain. And as to going to Peking, none
but the better-to-do monks dream of such dissipation. You may imagine
what a state of crass ignorance they live in. For faces expressing
brutal stupidity there is nothing to equal the Chinese monks, except
the Thibetan llamas, between whom and drivelling idiotcy there is no
missing link. My friend here, Fo Kwo, is a brilliant exception. Monks
and laymen alike—all our neighbours—vie with one another in civility
to us. They all stop one to have a chat, and as for tea, I might drown
myself in a butt of it if I had a mind. The women, however—and in one
village there are some very pretty ones—are as _farouches_ as wild
deer. As I ride in at one end of a village I see them scuttling off
into their houses, with their babies on their backs, as fast as their
poor deformed feet will let them. If by chance I overtake them, they
scowl at me as if I really were the devil they call me. During the
whole time I have been in China, I do not think that I have three times
been addressed by Chinese women; the rare exceptions have always been
wrinkled old hags—of course I do not count beggars. _Ces dames_ don’t
love us. They are always the first to get up the cry of “Kwei tzŭ”
(devils) against us, and I almost think that they verily believe that
there is something uncanny about us, or at any rate that there is no
villainy of which we are not capable. However, I think that last year I
told you some of their beliefs with respect to us.

Farquhar joined me on the 20th July, bringing with him Dr. Pogojeff
from the Russian summer quarters at Pa Ta Chu—a group of temples nearer
Peking, where most of the Legations spend the hot season. They are
delighted with the beauty of this place. Farquhar, who is a very clever
artist, has made some lovely sketches. July the 25th was the fifteenth
day of the Chinese moon, a high day with our Buddhist friends. On
ordinary days the novices do the drum and gong beating, and intone the
prayers (which indeed never seem to cease), but on the 1st and 15th of
each moon the higher priests—whose everyday duties seem to be confined
to smoking infinite and infinitesimal pipes of tobacco, and sipping cup
after cup of amber tea—buckle to the work themselves, leaving their
ease and dignity to don their black and yellow robes, and perform
service with the rest.

One day out walking we were accosted by a man who told us that he was
out for a holiday, and insisted on taking us with him to a village
where there was “Jo nao” (fun) going on. We could not resist, so we
went with him, and in a by-lane of the said village, on one of the
threshing-floors, we found a small raised stage. After we had waited
some time, during which the whole village had time to turn out for a
good stare at us, a man made his appearance with a very small drum,
three pairs of castanets, and three gongs. He was followed by three
ladies—one old and two young, and all hideous—and then the performance
began with an instrumental overture by the whole strength of the
company, a rattling and jangling which lasted five minutes, and sent us
off with our fingers in our ears. We gave the poor people a dollar and
were glad to escape; but the villagers were highly delighted, for were
not these real actors come all the way from Peking, and, therefore, of
course eminent? Mario and Grisi, starring in the provinces, never gave
more pleasure to a country audience.

Frightfully hot weather. Do you remember the old quatrain written with
a diamond on a pane of glass in the old Foreign Office in Downing
Street:—

    Je suis copiste,
    Affreux métier,
    Joyeux ou triste,
    Toujours copier!

Copying despatches with the thermometer at 100° in the shade, with
a basin of water and a towel at one’s side for very necessary
hand-wiping, and a pad of blotting-paper over the blank part of one’s
paper, is indeed an _affreux métier_.

I find that Englishmen who can’t speak the language are a little
capricious as to exchanging courtesies which the Chinese press upon
them. Sometimes it amuses them immensely to stop and talk twaddle with
the natives through an interpreter, while at others, especially if
there is just a touch of headache in the case, the Chinamen get short
answers. To-day as we were walking we passed a group of peasants, one
of whom as usual called out civilly, “Hsie yi hsie pa?” (Won’t you sit
down a bit?)

_F._—“What the devil’s he saying?”

_Chinaman_ (thinking to be intelligible by being still louder)—“Hsie yi
hsie pa!”

_F._—“Don’t make that damned noise!”

_I._—“He’s only asking you to sit down.”

_F._ (savagely)—“Well, he needn’t make such a confounded row about it!”

_Chinaman_ (to his friends)—“The gentleman is not very quiet,” as if he
were speaking of a restive horse.

_Friends_ (assenting)—“Ah! these foreigners! they are indeed terrible
people. Unsurpassable! unsurpassable!”

The poor villagers would have been too civil to utter their opinion if
they had thought they were understood, but I had held my tongue to hear
what they would say.

On the 16th of August we had a delightful addition to our family party
in the shape of my old friend Dick Conolly, who has come out as second
secretary—the cheeriest of companions.[17]

Next day he and I rode over to see a very famous temple, Hei Lung Tan,
a shrine dedicated to the Black Dragon, which was built in the Ming
dynasty and repaired in Ka̔ng Hsi’s reign. It is an imposing edifice
built in three tiers with roofs of the imperial yellow tiles. Here the
Black Dragon Prince rests in great dignity. He is surrounded by six
satellites—a monster who presides over the thunder, a woman who rules
the lightning, a clerk with pen and book who writes down orders for the
rainfall, and three others whose functions are not so clear. Of human
attendants there was visible but one priest, very dirty and saturated
with garlic. The Black Dragon being, like all dragons in this country,
a water deity or spirit, there is of course a pond in which he may
disport himself. If his priest would only do the same!

The country people are really very civil and kind. The other day we
were wandering through a village nestled away among the hills, when
several of the peasants came out and brought us delicious pears. One
old gentleman, a personage evidently, was just preparing a great
sacrifice outside his house to ward off the devil. He had erected an
altar on which were placed various fruits and grapes, and in front of
it was a great paper boat with dolls in it. This was to be burnt, and
with the letting off of many crackers would complete the sacrifice.
This, it appears, being the 15th day of the 7th moon, is the feast of
departed spirits—a sort of All Souls’ Day. It is the anniversary on
which the pious Chinaman worships and burns incense at the tombs of his
ancestors—the custom over which the Dominicans and Franciscans on the
one side, and the Jesuits on the other, started their great feud in the
days of the Emperor Ka̔ng Hsi.[18] There are also on this day great
ceremonies in honour of the tutelary saints of towns, some deceased
minister or warrior appointed by the Emperor as guardian over each
town or part of a town. Great honour is paid to one of these patron
saints, and men will flock to his shrine to dedicate themselves to his
service, so that a man, for instance, who is a groom in this life,
will go and offer himself to be the saint’s groom in the next world.
The effigy of this “Lord of the Walls,” as he is called, is paraded
through the town where he is supposed to search out evil-doers. There
is also a Prince of departed spirits whose shrine is largely attended
on this day. A stage is raised and priests are engaged to read prayers
and distribute food for the spirits, that those who have died a violent
death may be released from Purgatory. At midnight huge paper images,
placed in a boat in order that the spirits may pass the river Nai-ho, a
sort of Styx, are solemnly burnt, and the feast is over. The feast is
called Yu Lang Hai, “The assembly of the Bowl and Flower.” My teacher
explains this, saying that on board the boat there is a Buddhist god
called Ti Tsang Wang, who gives the ghosts of the departed a bowl and
flower as a token of release from their sins, so that they may cross
the river which is a gulf between them and Paradise.




                              LETTER XXIX


                                       PEKING, _7th September 1866_.

Some time ago I was invited to go to the play by the great curio
merchant here—Han Chang-kwei-ti. As the Pekingese theatres have a great
celebrity, I ought to give you some account of them.

There are a great many theatres in the Chinese city, their situation
being marked by a few masks, lay figures, images of tortoises or
dragons, or other queer beasts; though indeed no sign is necessary to
indicate their whereabouts, for the infernal din which comes from them
the whole day long would guide any one to them. The theatres are the
property of restaurateurs, who engage a company of actors to come and
play for so many days, so that the troupes are constantly changing
quarters. You go in by a long passage, which leads into a lofty and
spacious hall, lighted from the top, and surrounded by a gallery.
In the pit, or body of the hall, are tables at which the people sit
drinking tea, eating sweetmeats, or with papers of fried melon and
gourd seeds before them. This is the place of the poorer people; the
rank and fashion go to the gallery, part of which is divided into
private boxes. At one end of the hall is a raised platform, without
scenes or appliances of any kind, open at the sides, and separated
from the dressing-room by two doors with curtains; at the back of the
stage sit the orchestra, five or six performers, all of whom play
upon several instruments, which they take up in turn, according to
the character of the music. The chief instruments are fiddles, lutes,
clarionets, flutes, a sort of mouth organ, and any number of variety of
gongs, drums, and cymbals. I talk of fiddles, etc., for simplicity’s
sake, but you know a Chinese fiddle is no more like a European fiddle
than a Chinaman with his pig-tail is like a European in a chimney-pot
hat.

Nothing could be more rude or primitive than the state of the drama.
The tragedies are all strutting and mouthing; roaring in a bass
voice that seems to come out of the actor’s boots, or squeaking in
a falsetto shrill enough to set your teeth on edge. The whole of the
words are declaimed in a sort of recitative, which is more than half
drowned by the drums and gongs. The language of tragedies is the old
literary style and very obscure, and as if to make it still more
difficult to the Pekingese, the actors all affect the Soochow dialect
as the mother-tongue of the stage. The consequence of this is that even
a well-educated Chinaman will make a very poor guess at the plot unless
he has read the tragedy beforehand. Not understanding what is going
on does not, however, seem to affect the enjoyment of the audience,
nine-tenths of whom could no more tell you what the play is all about
than I could.

As there is no scenery or stage appliances a great deal must be
supplied by the imagination. A lady coming in with an attendant in the
plain clothes of a Pekingese coolie, holding horizontally on each side
of her two flags on which are painted wheels and clouds, is a fairy
entering in her chariot of clouds. A warrior brandishes a whip to show
that he is on horseback; to dismount, he makes a pirouette on one leg
and throws down his whip; to remount, he makes a pirouette on the other
leg and picks it up again. But let me tell you the plot of the tragedy
I saw, as Han Chang-kwei-ti explained it to me.

A warrior in white has an everlasting feud with a rebel in red, who
always gets the better of him, and performs the most astounding
_pas seuls_, making quite appalling faces (heightened by streaks of
red, blue, and white paint) to the terror of the whole empire, as
represented by five old men and two little boys in white. The warrior
in white, after a series of stage combats with the rebel in red, which
it would break the heart of our best pantomimists to imitate, sits down
in an arm-chair and tucks up one leg under him, by which the audience
are to understand that he has gone to sleep in a lonely forest. He
then dreams that the ghost of his father appears to him to teach him
a trick and give him a sword, by the aid of which he may circumvent
the rebel in red. The dream is represented by his getting up from his
chair and acting through the scene with his father’s ghost, after
which he sits down in the same posture as before. During one of his
dead father’s speeches, which may have struck him, as they did me,
as rather tedious, the actor felt a little thirsty, so he called for
a cup of tea, which a coolie brought to him, and he drank it with his
face to the audience, gargling his throat and spitting out the last
mouthful without the smallest regard for the situation. Well, the
father having stalked out, the warrior tucked up his leg again and then
awoke. A final combat of many rounds then terminates in the victory of
the warrior, obtained by the grace of his father’s sword. The rebel is
slain and walks out, and the victorious army, consisting of four wheezy
old men, make a triumphal entry into the gates of the capital, which
are signified by two coolies holding up two poles with a blue cotton
curtain in which a hole has been cut.

The dresses of the tragedians are magnificent. They are stiff with gold
and embroidery, and immensely valuable. The masks and painting of the
faces are to the last degree grotesque and hideous. The beards and wigs
are coarse and clumsily contrived.

After two or three historical pieces have been played a farce follows,
and indeed it is time that the proceedings should be enlivened a
little. The farces are not difficult to follow (though I cannot say
that I understand writers whom I know to be ignorant of Chinese, and
who say that the acting of the Pekingese comedians is so good that
the whole play is quite intelligible; I know I was out of my depth
often enough, in spite of the admirable acting, and of my being able
to understand a great deal of the dialogue). The dialect is the pure
Pekingese vernacular, and the dialogue is spoken with the exception
of a few songs. The women’s parts are played by boys, who imitate to
perfection the mincing gait and affectations of the Chinese women—“the
carriage as graceful as the weeping willow”—sham small feet are
attached to their own boots in order to carry out the illusion, which
is quite perfect. These boys are bought in the south and trained up as
apprentices. They receive no pay from the head of their troupe, but
they earn largish sums by attending the banquets of the Chinese men
about town; when they are not actually playing, they go up into the
private boxes to the richer visitors, whom they amuse with the last
gossip of the green-room.

The farces are too indecent for me to do more than give you a mere
sketch of one. Medea does not stop short of doing anything _coram
populo_, so I give you a sort of Bowdler’s family edition of the plot
of one that I saw.

A young gentleman of great wealth of the name of Wang has been ruined
by a mistress named Yu Tang Chun, who, strange to say, although his
money is all spent, still preserves a hankering for him. He, on the
other hand, finding himself without a penny, is ashamed to go near her,
so he retires to a temple to live by his wits. The scene opens with Yu
Tang Chun bewailing his absence and her solitude in a long recitative
and song (rather pretty for Chinese music). To her enters the low
comedy man—such a good actor, and so full of fun!—who tells her where
her lover is, and all about his deplorable state. She determines to
go and see him, and take him a present of 300 taels (£100) to enable
him to go to Peking and pass his examination. Accordingly, she sets
out, and a table with the five offerings is placed upon the stage to
represent a temple, to which she goes under the pretence of burning
joss stick. As soon as she sees her lover the two set up a wild shriek,
and rush into one another’s arms. Over what follows it is absolutely
necessary to draw a curtain. The play ends by her giving Wang the
money. He starts for Peking, and returns in a second or two, having
passed a brilliant examination and obtained high office. Sometimes,
but rarely, girls are present among the audience, and when this is the
case, it is only fair to say that these pieces—the grossness of which
passes all belief—are not given. On those occasions the playbill is
made up of military and historic dramas, the propriety of which is as
undeniable as their dulness.

The price of admission to the best theatres at Peking is one tiao
(about 8d.) to the pit, something more to the gallery, and a private
box costs twelve tiaos. As the whole thing is, as I said before, a
speculation of the _restaurateur’s_, refreshments are hawked about
during the whole performance. There is a man who carries about a long
pipe (like Herr von Joel with his cigars at Evans’s), who is very
persistent in seeking custom. If it is hot weather the people in the
pit take off their coats and lounge naked to the waist, sitting out the
whole performance from noon till seven P.M., after which they pack up
what remains to them of their fruit and melon seeds, and go off home,
not having had near enough of it.

I have been three or four times, and find that a couple of hours of the
din and smoke are as much as I can stand, besides which I find that
eating po-po out of politeness interferes with one’s dinner.

My time here is drawing very short. When I told my teacher that I was
going away he hummed and hawed, and shifted about uneasily. At last
he summoned up courage and said, “Sir, I have one last favour to ask
of you. The teachers of the West are very cunning in medicine; they
possess many secrets. I have no child, and it is a great sorrow! Bitter
is the life of the man who is childless! In vain have we addressed our
prayers to the goddess Kwan Yin, my wife remains barren. Sir, if you
could give me some drug or some charm to remove this evil, for small
favours one can find thanks, but for so great a favour none!”

Dear to man is the fame for abstruse learning! But I was obliged to
confess myself at fault.

I start for Japan on Monday week, and then good-bye to Peking!




                                APPENDIX

                         HOW MANDARINS ARE MADE


The literature of no country is so abundant in noble sentiments as that
of China. Happy, indeed, would be the people who should be governed
according to the precepts of Confucius, of Mencius, and of Lao Tsŭ! The
highest moral and political principles are in every mouth, at the tip
of every pen. From the first day of his entering school the Chinese boy
learns unctuously to recite the most virtuous precepts of the sages,
yet learning is the one road to fortune through robbery, peculation,
and extortion in their most refined shapes. With every rise in rank
the opportunities of robbing the “Hundred Names” and defrauding the
state are multiplied in a ratio increasing like the value of carats
in diamonds: the wealth amassed by some of the great mandarins must
be something fabulous. Take as an instance the war with Japan. The
Chinese soldier, when properly led and fairly treated is an excellent
fighting man. It is difficult to believe that the sons of the braves
who under Tsêng Kwo Fan and San Ko Lin Sin, so stubbornly defended the
bridge against the French and English in 1860, could have been driven
from an impregnable position like Fort Arthur by the Japanese some
thirty years later. But what troops could fight without food, arms,
ammunition? Food, arms, ammunition, and pay had all found their way
into the pockets of the mandarins. Would the brigade of Guards itself
have stood to be mown down without being able to fire an effective shot
in return? I was told on high authority that at the famous naval battle
of the Yalu, which some experts have quoted as an object lesson in the
naval warfare of the future, on the Chinese side only three live shells
were fired, one of which disabled the Japanese flagship, and sent her
steaming away into space. The comparison of the bankers’ books of some
of the great mandarins before and after the war would be an interesting
study.

The mandarins—one is compelled to use the old Portuguese word for want
of a better—are recruited from two classes: the hereditary nobility,
and those who obtain office nominally by examination, but often by
purchase.

The hereditary nobility is composed of the members of the Imperial
family with the five ranks, Kung, Hou, Po, Tsŭ, Nan,—which it has been
the fashion to translate by duke, marquis, earl, viscount, baron.

The highest rank in the Imperial family is that of Chin Wang—“related
prince,” or as we should say “Prince of the Blood.” In some cases this
title is continued from generation to generation; in others there is
a sliding scale downward through the ranks of Pei Lo and Pei Tsŭ to
that of Kung or duke, below which members of the Imperial family do not
descend.

In the same way with subjects, the rank of Kung is sometimes
transmitted; in others the son of a Kung becomes a Hou, the son of a
Hou a Po, and so on. The inheritor of a title must be the eldest son
of the one legitimate wife, and not of a secondary wife, for although
polygamy exists in China, there is, except in the case of the Emperor’s
family, only one legitimately married wife, nor in her lifetime can
there be another. The younger sons of nobles, even of the Imperial
family, have no rank either by right or by courtesy; but the latter are
generally raised to rank by being appointed general officers. Patents
of nobility cannot be bought, at any rate not in theory.

The representative of the eldest branch of a family can, in the event
of his being childless, adopt the child of a younger branch, and the
child so adopted inherits the title. It sometimes happens that a
younger brother who has become rich will bribe his eldest brother to
adopt his child to the exclusion of the lawful heir and his issue.

The sovereign is, as with us, the fountain of honour, and it is he who
confers these titles of nobility, which are accompanied by grants of
land. As a general rule the land assigned to a Kung or a Hou would not
exceed a circumference of 100 li = 33 miles, to a Po 70 li, and to the
two lesser ranks 50 li.

Conspicuous among the nobles of China are the Pa Ta Chia, “the Eight
great Families.” These are the descendants of the eight Princes who,
waiving any claim to the throne, followed the reigning dynasty from
Manchuria. Their rank remains unchanged for all generations. The
representative of one of these, the Prince of I, was famous in the
war of 1860. A year later, at the time of the Prince of Kung’s _coup
d’état_, he fell into disgrace, and was “presented with the white
kerchief” (made to commit suicide).

But the Imperial family and the hereditary nobles at Peking, valuable
instruments of obstruction as they doubtless are, form but an
infinitesimal portion of that colossal octopus of fraud and corruption
which strangles the whole vast empire in its tentacles. The myriads of
officials, from the exalted viceroys down to petty bloodsuckers of a
rank about equal to that of a parish beadle, are either drawn from the
so-called graduates of the examination halls, or have obtained their
promotion by purchase—of the latter mode of reaching distinction there
is nothing to be said; it is beautifully simple. But the examination
system is very complicated and deserves some notice.

The following account of how mandarins are made is based upon an
article of mine, for the most part translated from a paper by a native
graduate, and published in _Macmillan’s Magazine_ in 1871:—

At the age of from six to eight years the Chinese boy is removed from
the petting and pampering of the women’s apartments and is sent to
school, where he receives his first lessons in reading and writing
as purely mechanical processes. He is taught to read by droning out
passages from the classics in hideous unison with his schoolmates,
and to write by painting over characters printed on thin whitey-brown
paper. This preliminary process of education lasts for some two
years or more, at the end of which the young student is looked upon
as sufficiently advanced to be instructed in the meaning of what he
reads. The books now put into his hands are, of course, the famous Four
Books and the Five Classics, every passage in which, with its hidden
obscurities and doubtful interpretations, is diligently and painfully
explained to him, until not only the text itself, but also every note
and commentary with which successive ages of scholars have overlaid it,
are familiar in his mouth as household words. Having accomplished this
end the youth is allowed to try a flight upon his own wings, and begins
to write essays and poetry, which, by useful and assiduous reading,
he must model upon the best patterns. “Poetry of the Tang dynasty,
handwriting of the Chin dynasty, essays of the Han dynasty,” says the
proverb; these, with all humility, should the student endeavour to
follow at however great a distance.

As soon as the young man’s compositions begin to take some sort of
shape, and to satisfy the keen criticism of his master, when his
language is neatly fitted to his thoughts, and he does not use so
much as a particle out of its place, he may look forward to preparing
himself to undergo his examination for the degree of Hsin Tsai, or
Bachelor of Arts.

The examiner for this degree is an officer from the Han Lin (lit.
Forest of Pencils), or Imperial Academy of Peking, and is specially
appointed by the Emperor; one examiner is appointed for each province
throughout the country, and he holds his examinations from town to town
in the chief places of the province to which he is accredited.

We will suppose the examination to be taking place at Shun Ti̔en Fu,
the provincial capital of Chih Li (the province in which Peking is
situated). The examiner, having arrived with no small arrogance of
dignity, takes up his abode in the Examination Hall inside the town. On
an appointed day the undergraduate candidates from the various Chou and
Hsien, or lesser towns which are dependent upon Shun Ti̔en Fu, crowd
into the hall, and take their places each according to the township
to which he may belong. As soon as his flock is gathered together, the
examiner gives out two themes selected from the Four Books to serve
as texts for essays, and one subject for an exercise in verse. Each
candidate is expected to produce two essays and one set of twelve
verses in rhyme; but he has plenty of time to perform his task, for the
examination begins at four o’clock in the morning, and the papers are
not given in until between five and seven o’clock in the evening. On
the third day the examination list is given out: the examiner writes
out the names of the successful candidates in order of merit, and gives
it to the overseers of the hall, who, carrying it respectfully on their
heads, go out and paste it on the wall fronting the entrance gate.
Then follows a scene of excitement when the undergraduates besiege
the gate to search for their names on the list. (Oxford over again!)
“Should they have been successful,” says a native account, “they are
now entitled to call themselves Hsin Tsai, and are so delighted that
in their joy everything in heaven and earth seems lovely to them,” and
they look forward to the day when they will receive the much-coveted
official button.[19] The unhappy plucked ones must make the best of
it and try again. Even now the Hsin Tsai’s troubles are not over;
for there is a second examination, in which they are divided into
three classes—the first class being privileged graduates eligible
for honorary degrees entitling the possessors to become candidates
for bettermost civil appointments. There is yet another distinction
open to the privileged bachelors. Once in twelve years the degree of
Pa Kung is given to a representative of each petty township: it is
also conferred on the successful competitor in an examination held of
privileged bachelors, in which case it is awarded to the cleverest,
most respectable, and youngest of his class. When certain official
appointments of an inferior grade are about to be made, the Emperor
summons the bachelors of the grade of Pa Kung to court, where they
are again made to go through an examination, and divided into three
classes. The members of the first class are employed as brass button
mandarins (officials of the seventh, eighth, and ninth classes); those
of the second class are sent to be Chih Hsien, or magistrates of
small towns; while the remainder are only eligible for employment as
assistants in the public examinations.

Such, briefly, are the honours and offices open to a man who has passed
his first examination. The degree of Chü Jên is a much more serious
affair.

This examination takes place in fixed years; and when the appointed
time comes all bachelors ambitious of promotion, together with a class
of graduates called Chien Shêng, who have purchased their degree,
prepare in fear and trembling for the ordeal.

On the 6th day of the 8th month of the year an Imperial decree is
issued, appointing the officials who are to conduct the examination.
There are three chief examiners and eighteen assistant examiners, with
a whole number of subordinates, who search the candidates as they come
in, to see that no books, or memoranda, or other aids to intelligence,
are smuggled in; besides these there is a strong _posse_ of Imperial
informers, who watch all that goes on, and keep up a sort of secret
police in the hall. The whole of the compositions of the masters
expectant are handed over to copyists, who transcribe them, lest the
handwritings of the candidates being recognised by the examiners
there should be any foul play, and the copies so made are compared
with the originals by clerks appointed for the purpose. Besides all
these persons, there are 180 minor officials who superintend all petty
details. The examination is divided into three parts. On the 8th day
of the month the first part begins. The candidates are divided into
four companies, to each of which is assigned a door. At each of the
doors stand two Imperial informers—the one a Manchu, the other a
Chinese—whose duty it is to mark off the names of the candidates, and
to distribute to each a roll of paper, giving the number of the cell
allotted to him, to which he carries his provision of food and bedding,
for he will be locked up in solitary confinement for three days and
nights. In the evening, when the candidates have all been pricked
in, every door is sealed, and all coming in or going out is rendered
impossible.

The exercises set for the first part of the examination consist of
three essays from the Four Books, and one composition in verse. The
first subject is selected, or supposed to be selected, by the Emperor
in person, and the remainder are chosen by the chief examiners. The
_Cycle_, an English newspaper published at Shanghai, once gave the
texts chosen for such exercises at an examination held at Wu Chang.

I. From the _Lun Yu_, the _Analects of Confucius_:—“Tsŭ Yu, being
governor of Wu Ching, the master said to him, ‘Have you got such a
thing as a real Man in the place?’ He answered, ‘Here is Tan Tai Mieh
Ming, who does not in walking side off by a short cut, nor come to my
office except on public business.’”

II. From the _Chung Yung_ of Kung Chi, the grandson of Confucius:—“He
only who is accomplished, learned, profound, and critical, has
wherewith to exercise sound judgment.”

III. From the _Shang Mang_ of Mencius:—“When any one told Tsŭ Lu that
he had a fault he was pleased with him. When Yu heard anybody say a
wise thing he bowed to him.”

Each of these essays was required to contain not less than three
hundred, nor more than eight hundred words.

The theme for the poetical exercise was “An observer of the beauties
of Nature being so absorbed as to forget the march of a whole round of
seasons.”

Such are the proofs of superior wisdom and learning in which if a man
excel he is qualified to rule others! Chinese scholarship is very
difficult of attainment; perhaps if it were impossible the world would
hardly be much the poorer.

When the subjects have been selected and approved by the Emperor, they
are sealed up in a box and given over to the care of a chief eunuch of
the palace, to be handed to the chief examiners, who cause them to be
engraved on wood and printed. On the 10th day of the month the essays
are handed in, and the candidates leave the building.

The officers having received the exercises, examine them carefully to
see whether there be any informality in them: if they should discover
anything like an infringement of prescribed custom the papers are
rejected, the peccant candidate’s name is struck off the list, and
he is incapacitated from taking part in the second examination. If
the papers are in due form they are sent into the copying department,
where they are copied in red ink; thence into the comparing department,
and sealing department, where the mottoes borne by the originals are
pasted on to them. They now find their way into the superintendent’s
office, and he forwards them to the eighteen junior examiners.

With pain and care, measuring every word and weighing to a nicety the
fitness of every particle, these learned men apply themselves to the
criticism of the papers before them. Those that find favour in their
eyes are docketed as good, and given back to the superintendent, who
passes them to the three chiefs. Should they fail to satisfy these they
are thrown into the waste-paper basket, but the candidate still has the
credit of having passed the first test. Should they satisfy the chiefs
they are marked with the character Chung, signifying that they have hit
the mark; but only a limited number of candidates are admitted to the
degree at one examination.

The second examination takes place on the 11th day of the month,
and consists in writing five essays upon texts taken from the Five
Classics; the third test, which is held on the 14th of the month, is
devoted to the propounding of five sets of questions on the subject
of literature, political economy, or general science. According to
the _Cycle_, “the first question asked at Wu Chang was of the nature
of criticism of the classics; the second question was on historical
matters; the third on military colonisation. (The Chinese Government
hoping to save their western provinces by allotting land to soldiers
on the frontier line, requiring them to keep themselves in readiness
for fighting.) The fourth question entered into the various plans
adopted by previous dynasties in the selection of suitable persons to
hold the offices of government. The fifth question referred to the
ancient and modern geography of Ching Chan Fu, the course of the waters
of the Han and the Yangtze, and the history of the Tung Ting Lake.” The
answers to each of the five questions were to contain a minimum of five
hundred words.

It occasionally happens that after the list of successful candidates
has been made up, the work of some new bachelor is recommended to the
notice of the examiners. Should the essays which he sends in show
pre-eminent ability, their fortunate author is rewarded with the degree
of Fu Pang, or assistant master; and if the list of Fu Pang be already
full, then he is appointed Tan Lu, a distinction bringing with it no
advancement in rank in the state, but rendering its possessor eligible
for certain offices.

During the examination at Wu Chang a subordinate official of the
examination hall was convicted of having passed manuscripts to one of
the candidates. The punishment was summary. The official was beheaded,
the candidate banished to the frontiers, and the graduate who wrote the
forged essay was sentenced to be executed when captured. As the writer
of the article in the _Cycle_, from which I have quoted, observes, “It
is interesting to find the Chinese authorities so prompt and just in
punishing the guilty. If some unfortunate foreigner had been murdered
by these precious literati, the governor would have declared it to
be impossible to touch the offenders in the presence of a myriad of
members of their order.” More probably he would either have declared
that he could not find them, or have executed a certain number of
jail-birds as substitutes.

Perhaps the candidate was a foolish candidate, and hush-money was
either wanting or insufficient. But in that case it was as it should
be, for by not bribing he clearly showed his incapacity for holding
high official position. He did not recognise the privileges of the
class which it was his ambition to enter, and he gave the officers of
the hall an opportunity of showing a little cheap zeal in the execution
of their duty, to his great discomfiture.

When the three tests are ended and the degrees have all been conferred,
the superintendent of the examination hall addresses a petition to
the Emperor, praying that a day may be fixed for publishing the names
of the successful candidates. This generally takes place on the
10th day of the following month. On the first day of the ceremonies
of publication a table is ordered to be set out in the hall called
Chih Kung Tang, the Hall of Justice unsurpassed. The three chief
examiners, with the two chief superintendents, solemnly take their
places at the table, and on either side, spread out diagonally “like
a goose’s wings,” as the Chinese writer puts it, are the eighteen
junior examiners, all clad in their official robes. All this galaxy of
learning and wisdom is gathered together to witness the breaking of
the seals of the exercises, and to hear the calling out of the names
which are written on the list. Next morning, before daybreak, the list
is rolled up and placed inside a palanquin of honour, richly decorated
with coloured silks; a procession is formed, headed by standard-bearers
carrying emblems, as at a wedding, and the whole heaven is filled with
the sound of drums and of delicate music, gongs being beaten to clear
the road. Immediately behind the palanquin containing the precious
list march the chief examiners and their subordinates, who accompany
it outside the Dragon Gate. This gate of the examination hall is so
called allegorically, because in the same way as the fish rose from
the sea to heaven, and became perfected into the heavenly dragon, so
the successful candidates have, by the grace of learning, cast off the
grosser clay of which they were formed, and have risen to the heaven of
rank and fame. The superintendents of the hall escort the list as far
as the outer gate of the provincial capital, where it is hung up on a
high platform specially erected for the purpose.

When the list has thus been finally published, etiquette requires
that the new Masters of Arts should go and pay their respects to the
chief and junior examiners. At these visits much wine is drunk, and an
adjournment to the theatre takes place, where the party witness the
deadly dulness of an historical piece, relieved, it is true, by the
performance of grossly indecent farces, and by the consumption of the
usual refreshments of fried melon-seeds, sweetmeats, cakes, and tea.

In spite of all the pains taken nominally to insure fairness and
exclude any possibility of trickery, Chinese ingenuity would belie
itself if it did not find means of giving the slip to all law and rule,
and of satisfying greed thereby. Though the candidate’s name is not
known until the papers have been examined and judged, they will be
framed in such a way as to let the examiner know who is the author—as,
for instance, by agreeing beforehand that the briber’s essay shall
begin and end with certain words. On the other hand, if the officers of
the copying and comparing departments have not received their fee, they
can throw any candidate’s work all out of tune with the greatest ease.
Nor is there any appeal. The copy in red ink which is sent in to the
junior examiners stands as the _ipsissima verba_ of the writer. By one
slip a spiteful copyist may spoil the best essay.

The examination for the third and highest degree, that of Chin Shih, or
Doctor, does not differ materially in character from that of Chü Jên
or Master of Arts, except in the fact that whereas the latter is held
in provincial capitals, the former is held only at Shun Tien Fu, at
which city the candidates from every part of the empire have to attend.
The expense and difficulties of what may be a very long and expensive
journey naturally tend to limit the number of aspirants.

After the publication of the list of successful candidates a last
examination is held at Peking in the Imperial palace. According to
their performances in this final test the doctors are divided into
three classes. The first class consists only of the three best men in
order of merit, who are called respectively Chuang Yüan, Pang Yüan, and
Tan Hwa, which might be translated Senior Wrangler, Second Wrangler,
and Golden Spoon; the second class contains from seven to ten names;
and the third class is made up of the remainder, and may consist of two
hundred men or more. At the second part of this examination the doctors
are presented to the Son of Heaven, who in person appoints them to
various offices in the state. The Senior Wrangler is usually employed
as a writer of records in the Forest of Pencils, while the Second
Wrangler and the Golden Spoon are appointed to be correctors. All the
doctors are sure of obtaining some appointment, but not of keeping it
unless they show official capacity, of which the most infallible proof
is the liberal opening of a long purse.

“In the olden time,” writes a native author, “a man need only pass the
degree of Hsin Tsai, or Bachelor, to be sure of obtaining some office
in the state. But nowadays there are too many who buy their rank, so
that a man’s merit is measured by the capacity of his purse, while the
right men are pushed out of the right place. Hence it comes that many a
ripe scholar, if he have but enough means to keep the life within him,
and be a man of spirit to boot, will rather remain in obscurity as a
private individual than be mixed up with such men as hold office. Good
men holding aloof, the officials of the country are but a sorry lot
after all. How can we be surprised if discontent and treason are rife?”

These are the words of a modern scholar, savouring somewhat of sour
grapes, it is true. Yet as early as five hundred years before Christ,
Lao Tsŭ, the founder of the Taoist sect, pointed out the vanity and
hollowness of the system of education and government into which the
country was drifting. “If some men,” said the sage, “would abandon
their learning and cast away their wisdom the people would be benefited
a hundred-fold.” Of all the Chinese philosophers Lao Tsŭ was probably
the one whose teaching of simple virtue approached the nearest to the
Christian standard. Confucius himself, after having had an interview
with him, said to his disciples, “I know how the birds fly, how the
fishes swim, how the beasts run, and the runner may be snared, the
swimmer may be hooked, and the flyer may be shot by the arrow.[20] But
there is the dragon. I cannot tell how he mounts on the wind through
the clouds and rises to heaven. To-day I have seen Lao Tsŭ, and can
only compare him to the dragon.”[21]

It can hardly be said that matters have improved since the old days of
Lao Tsŭ.


[Illustration: PLAN OF PEKING

By permission of “The Times.”


REFERENCE.

  1. British Legation.
  2. Russian    ”
  3. American   ”
  4. German     ”
  5. Spanish    ”
  6. Japanese   ”
  7. French     ”
  8. Austrian   ”
  9. Italian    ”
  10. Imperial Maritime Customs
  11. American Mission and Hospital Buildings.
  12. British    do.         do.
  13. French Eastern Cathedral and Mission Buildings.
  14. French Southern Cathedral and Mission Buildings.
  15. French Northern Cathedral and Mission Buildings.

London: Macmillan & Co., Ltd.

_Stanford’s Geog^l. Estab^t. London_]




                                 INDEX


Acrobats, 233

Agriculture, soil, etc., 87, 109, 137, 261, 298, 318

Albazines, Russian colony in Peking, 212, Pref. li.

Alcock, Sir Rutherford, at Peking, 177, 182, 184, 189, 240; municipal
    system established by, at Shanghai, 40

American commercial interests in China, 263

Ancestor worship and religious rites, 171, 222, 345, Pref. xxix.–xxxiv.
    (See also Monks.)

Anti-foreign feeling in China, 29, 39, 238, Pref. vi.–viii. xi. xiv.
    xli.

Anting plain, 75

Apakwai, widow, 284–286

Arithmetic, Chinese method of counting on fingers, 248

Army, Chinese, inferiority of, 83; review, 75; war with Japan, 357

Astrology, belief in influence on health, 94


“Beggar’s Bridge,” Peking, 95, 127

Belgian interests in China, 264

Boat women, 2, 18

Books on China, Pref. v. xvi. xli. lviii.

Boots, Chinese pockets, 70, 259

Brenchley, Mr., 312, 313

Brick tea made for Mongolia, 272

British Legation, Peking, described, 66

Bruce, Sir Frederic, 71, 317

Buddhism, Pref. xiii. xiv. xix.

Buildings described—
  British Legation, Peking, 66
  Hong-kong houses, 3
  Interior of a Peking mandarin’s home, 230
  Shih-san-Ling, Ming tombs, 156–162, 249
  Temples (see that name)
  Theatre in Peking, 347
  Yuen-Ming-Yuen, Imperial summer palace, 111–116

Burmah, Pref. li.

Business methods, 147


Caffieri, 244

Camels, 322

Candida, Christian convert in seventeenth century, 22, 36

Canton, description of, 17–32; bombardment of, in 1856, 24; population,
    24; prosperity of, 29; Shah-Meen, English quarter, 30; temples, 25;
    gardens, 30

Capital city, advisability of change, Pref. xliv.–lvii.

Cavagnari, Sir Louis, murder of, at Cabul, Pref. viii.

Céladon, Jaspé, 244

Cemeteries, beauty of sites for, 87, 158

Cha Mai Chu, muleteer, 317

Cha Tao, 254

Chai Ling, Mongolia, 326

Chang Chia Ko̔u, frontier town, Mongolia, 261, 265, 313, 315

Chang Hsi, Mr. Mitford’s servant, 178, 246, 249, 270

Chang Leang, Mongolia, 320

Chang-ma-tsze-chin, Mongolia, 283

Chang-Ping-Chou, scene of tragedy of 1860, 153, 155, 249

Chang-tu-ho, Mongolia, 286

Chien-Lung, Emperor, 65, 100, 101, 335

Chien Mên, gate in Peking, 222

Chien Shêng, class of graduates, 365

Chih Hsien, magistrates of small towns, 364

Chihfu town, 45

Chihli, province in which is Peking, 362, Pref. li.

Chi-ling, or Kylin, 157

Chin Shih, degree, 372

Chinese characteristics, etc.—
  Anti-foreign feeling, 29, 39, 238, Pref. vi.–viii. xi. xiv. xli.
  Clothing, 185, 190
  Country folk, civility of, 96, 129, 294, 304, 345; exception, 138
  Dirt of, 34, 95
  Domestic life, unknown to foreigners, 229
  Ignorance of European life and customs, 124
  Inquisitiveness, 96, 123, 258, 295
  Noise, love of, 102, 122, 260, 341
  Superstitions, a bar to progress, 167
  Sweetmeats, fondness for, 171
  Thieves, cleverness of, 9
  Traders, ability as, Pref. xxxix.

Chinese Mesopotamian treaty, 174

Ching dynasty (the present), Pref. xxiii.–xxv.

Ching Ta̔i, Emperor, 244

Cholera, 204

Chopsticks, 78, 232

Chou-Hsin, Emperor, 214

Christianity (see under Religion)

Chü Jên, degree, 364–372

Chu-Yung-Kwan, town, 253

Chung, Minister of Foreign Office, 237

Chung Ch’êng, Emperor, Pref. xxv.

Chwang Yuen, Chinese senior wrangler, 373

Civilisation of China, ancient _v._ modern, Pref. ix.–xi.

Clement XI., Pope, important decision of, Pref. xxxiii.

Climate and temperature, 80, 87, 106–108, 163, 179, 184, 200, 209, 217,
    239, 282, 308, 310, 315, 342; Hong-kong, 12; rain and snow prayed
    for, 88, 209, 217, 314

Cloisonné enamel, 126, 244

Clothing, Chinese, 185, 190

Coalfields, 257

Confucius—
  Enlightened teaching of, Pref. x. xxxii.; worship of, Pref.
    xxix.–xxxiv.; eulogy of Lao Tsŭ, 374

Conolly, Dick, 344

Cooks, Chinese, ability of, 20, 114

Corea, expedition to, by Mr. Thomas, 206–208

Country folk, civility of, 96, 129, 294, 304, 345; exception, 138

Crealock, Mr., 57

Currency, 311

_Cycle_, the, Shanghai paper, quoted, 366, 369


Davis, Sir John, referred to, 150, Pref. v.

Degrees (see under Education)

Denmark, interests in China, 264

Dirt of Chinese, 34, 95

Diseases and medicine—
  Chinese doctors and remedies, 93, 107, 116
  Cholera, 204
  Deafness, 305
  Goitres, 305
  “Ho ting hung,” poisonous drug, 193
  Ophthalmia, 117
  Smallpox, 71, 310

Dogs, 23, 82, 96, 164, 246, 275, 281, 285

Domestic life of Chinese, unknown to foreigners, 229

Dominicans, Pref. xxvi. xxx.–xxxiv.

Dragons, myths concerning, 154, 314

Dust storms, 63


Education, early, 361; degrees, 142, 362–373; village school, 303;
    morality taught, but not practised, 357

Elgin, Lord, 68

Emperors—
  Chien-Lung, 65, 100, 101, 335
  Ching Ta̔i, 244
  Chou-Hsin, 214
  Chung Ch’êng, Pref. xxv.
  Dynasties of, Pref. x. xxiii.
  Hsien Fêng, 73 (note)
  Ka̔ng-Hsi, 212, 302, 345, Pref. xxv. xxvii. xxxi.–xxxv.
  Kwang Hsu (reigning), Pref. xlix. lvi.
  Ming dynasty established, Pref. xvii.; Ming tombs, 156–162, 249
  Ming Ti, Pref. xiii.
  Names given to, 160
  Shih, builder of the Great Wall, 148
  Shun Chih, Pref. xxv.
  Tao Kwang, 74
  Tung Chi, 73 (note)
  Wan Li, Pref. xx.
  Wu Wang, 213
  Yung Chêng, Pref. xxxv.
  Yung-Lo, 159

Empress Tsŭ Hsi (reigning), history of, 73 (note); choice of capital,
    Pref. xlvii. xlviii. l. lii.

Empress-dowager, honours paid to, in China, 73 (note)

England, commercial interests in China, 263, Pref. li.; Lord
    Salisbury’s policy, Pref. liv.

Execution, Chinese, described, 190–199


Farquhar, Sir Eric, 311, 340, 344

Feet, women’s, 137

Felt, Chinese method of making, 321

Fêng Ming Hsien, Mongolia, 301

“Fêng Shui,” wind and water system, 167

Fireworks, 171

“Flower-boats,” 19

Fohkien, province, 181

Food, ability of Chinese cooks, 20, 114; daily meals in Hong-kong,
    13; feasts given by Hêng-Chi, 77–79, 203; breakfast given to
    Europeans by a mandarin, 232; restaurant in Peking, 312; in Mongol
    yurts, 279; difficulty of obtaining in the country, 331; game,
    180; sweetmeats, or “po-po,” 171, 203; brick tea in Mongolia, 272;
    “Rice,” term for meals, 138

France, China question and, 263, Pref. li.

Franciscans, Pref. xxvi. xxx.–xxxiv.

Frater, Mr., 128, 150

Funeral, Chinese, 306


Game, 180

Gardens, private, in Canton, 30

Germany, China question and, 263, Pref. xlvii. l.

God (Christian) controversy concerning Chinese name for, Pref. xxvi.
    xxix. xxxi.–xxxiv.

Gods and goddesses—
  Kwan-Ti, god of war, 201, 223, 273
  Kwang-Yin, goddess of mercy, 154
  Ti Tsang Wang, 346
  Tsai-shên, god of commerce, 172
  Tsao, god of the hearth, 220
  Wên Shên, god of pestilence, 204

Goitres, 141, 305

Gordon, Gen., 84

Government, Chinese—
  Foreign policy, 85, 118, 169, 174–177, 181, Pref. xlvii.–l.; dread of
    reform, Pref. xi.; corruption of officials, 360, 370; over-taxation
    in the country, 153

Government, foreign, past and future policy, Pref. xliv.–lvii.

Great Wall, 137, 148–150, 273, 318

Gros, Baron, 68, 165, 167


Ha Pa Chiao, Mongolia, 289

Hai Tien, village, 331

Hailstones, formation and size, 310

Han Chang-kwei-ti, merchant, Peking, 347

Hart, Sir Robert, 118, 226

“Heavenly Flowers” (smallpox), 310

Hei Lung Tan, temple, 344

Hêng-Chi, Minister of Foreign Affairs, 69, 72, 75–79, 168, 203, 237, 260

Ho Nan, province, Pref. xiii.

“Ho ting hung,” poisonous drug, 193

Hong-kong—
  Landing at, 1–3; general description, 3–15; life in, 12; mixed
    population of, 5

Horses, 51, 164, 257, 275, 284, 332; horse brigands, 288; horse-fair,
    292

House-steamers between Hong-kong and Canton, 16

Hsi an Fu, intended creation of, as capital, by Empress Tsŭ Hsi, Pref.
    l. liii.

Hsiang Shui Pu, town, 257

Hsien Fêng, Emperor, 73 (note)

Hsin Pao An, town, 255

Hsin Tsai, 363

Hsü, Minister of Foreign Affairs, 181

Hsü Hsien Shêng, Mr. Mitford’s teacher, 178

Hsüeh, Minister, degradation of, 182

Hsuên Hwa Fu, town, 260

Hsuan Hua Fu, city, 257

Hung Tu̔ng Tien, Mongolia, 297

Hwai Lai Hsien, town, 254


I, Prince of, 360

Inns and lodgings (see under Travelling)

Inquisitiveness of Chinese, 96, 123, 258, 295

Insects, 91, 101, 123, 139, 326

Intemperance, rarity of, in China, 255


Japan, war with China, 357; civilisation of, Pref. viii. x.

Jesuits, history of, in China, Pref. xvii.–xxxvi.

Jews in China, Pref. xii.

Jo Hol, palace in Manchuria, 101

John of Monte Corvino, Pref. xv.

Jugglers, 234

Junks, 18


Kai Fêng, Jewish colony, Pref. xii.

Kambaluk, ancient name for Peking, Pref. xv.

Kang (stove), 133

Ka̔ng-Hsi, Emperor, 212, 302, 345; Pref. xxv. xxvii. xxxi.–xxxv.

Kites, 221

Kou Mên Tzŭ, Mongolia, 295

Kowloon, peninsula, 14

Ku, Mr. Mitford’s teacher, 81, 178

Ku Pei Ko̔u, frontier town, Mongolia, 141–150, 307, 315, 327

Ku-Lin-Shu, village, 129

Kung, Prince of, 67–72, 165, 187, 189, 240

Kwa Ti Erh, Mongolia, 298

Kwa Yo Erh, Mongolia, 304

Kwan-Ti, god of war, 201, 223, 273

Kwang Hsu, Emperor (reigning), Pref. xlix. lvi.

Kwang—Yin, goddess of mercy, 154

Kwei Chao, town, Pref. xlvii.

Kwo Chia Tu̔n, Mongolia, 298


Language—
  “Pidgin” English, 4; how Mr. Mitford learnt Chinese, 81, 91;
    difficulties of, incident, 342; accurate knowledge of, necessary to
    missionaries, Pref. xxxvi.

Lao Tsŭ, founder of Taoist sect, 374

Lao Wo Pu̔, Mongolia, 297

Li, governor of province, 84

Li, herbalist at Ku Pei Ko̔u, 327

Li Hung Chang, Pref. xi. xlix. lvii.

Liang, minister, 213

Liang Kung Fu, British Legation, Peking, 66

Lien Hwa Tan, Mongolia, 318

“Ling Chih,” punishment by slow death, 198

Literary style, importance of, in China, Pref. xix.

Liu, account by, of Ta-Chio-Ssŭ, 333

Liu-Li-Chang, street in Peking, 126, 224

Lizards, 110

Llama Miao, Mongolia, 290–294

Llama temple, Peking, 119

Llamas (see Monks)

Longobardi, Father, Pref. xxii.

Lung Wang Miao, temple, 314


Ma, merchant, Canton, 241–243

Ma Shên Miao, temple, 286

Macao, 32, 264

Maigrot, Bishop, Pref. xxxi. xxxiii. xxxiv.

Manchuria, reigning dynasty from, 360;
  Russia and, Pref. li.

Mandarins—
  Attainment of rank, 358–374; unprincipled character of, 217, 357;
    hostility to foreigners, Pref. vi. xi. xiv. xli.

Martin, Dr., Chinese translation of Wheaton’s _International Law_, 86

Mas, M. de, Spanish Minister, 168

Medicine (see Disease)

Mezzabarba, papal legate to Ka̔ng Hsi, Pref. xxxiv.

Miao Fêng Shan, shrine, 309

Military review, 75

Ming dynasty, Pref. xvii. xxiii.–xxv.

Ming Ti, Emperor who introduced Buddhism, Pref. xiii.

Ming Tombs, Shih-san-Ling, 156–162, 249

Missionaries—
  History of early missions, Pref. xv.–xxxvi.; religious dissensions
    amongst themselves, Pref. xxix.–xxxiv. xliii.; qualifications
    necessary to succeed in China, Pref. xxxvi.–xxxviii.; French, 169;
    unwise championship of converts, Pref. xlii.; Russian Mission in
    Peking, 210, 212; China Inland Mission, Pref. xliii.

Mi-Yün-Hsien, city, 136, 150

Mobbing Europeans, 258, 319

Mohammedanism, Pref. xiii. xiv.

Mongolia—
  Chai Ling, 326
  Chang Chia Ko̔u, 313, 315
  Chang Leang, 320
  Chang-tu-ho, 286
  Chinese boundary of, 308
  Chinese colonies in, 283, 307
  Dogs, 281
  Fêng Ming Hsien, 301
  Food eaten in yurts, 272, 279
  Ha Pa Chiao, 289
  Horses (see that name)
  Hung Tu̔ng Tien, 297
  Kou Mên Tzŭ, 295
  Kwa Ti Erh, 298
  Kwa Yo Erh, 304
  Kwo Chia Tu̔n, 298
  Lao Wo Pu̔, 297
  Lien Hwa Tan, 318
  Llama Miao, 290–294
  Mongols, 120, 134, 281, 284
  Niu Chuên Tzŭ, 301
  Pa Ta, 273
  Pan Shan Tu, 276
  Passes into, from China, 315
  Po Li Nao, 304
  Shi Pa Li Tai, 274
  Shou Hu Ying, 302
  Shui-Hsien-Tszŭ, 295
  Steppes, 274
  Ta Kao, 324
  Ta Liang Ti, 287
  Ta Tan, 321
  Tu Shih Ko̔u, 318
  Tu-ting, 272
  Yurts or huts, 277–282

Monks and llamas, 27, 88, 104, 291, 336–339, 341, 344, 345

Morales, Spanish Dominican, 31

Morrison, Dr., quoted, Pref. xiii. xli.

Mu-Chia-Yu, 137

Mules (see under Travelling)

Murray, Mr., 146, 150

Musical instruments, 121, 222, 233, 348


Nanchang, school established by Father Ricci, Pref. xix.

Nanking, meaning of name, 61; suggested as capital in place of Peking,
    Pref. xlv.–liv.

Nan-Ko̔u, town and pass, 250–254

Nei Nei Shan, mountain, 256

New Year festivities in Peking, 220–226

Niu Chuên Tzŭ, Mongolia, 301

Niu-Lan-Shan, 130

Nobility of China, 358–360

Noise, Chinese love of, 102, 122, 260, 341


Ophthalmia, 117

Opium smokers and trade, 300; Pref. xxxix.–xli.


Pa Kung, degree, 364

Pa Ta, Mongolia, 273

Pa Ta Chia, “Eight great Families,” 360

Pa Ta Chu, Russian summer quarters, 340

Pa Ta Ling, ruins of, 254

Palikao bridge, 57

Palladius, Archimandrite, 210

Palmerston, Lord, 188, 213

Palmistry, 107, 328

Pan Shan Tu, Mongolia, 276

Pang Yuen, Chinese second wrangler, 373

Pantoja, companion of Father Ricci, Pref. xx.

Pao, mandarin in Chang Chia Ko̔u, 267–269

Parkes, Sir Harry, 38

Partition of China, Pref. l.–liv.

Passport difficulties, 266–269

Peiho river, 48–50, 55

Peking—
  “Beggar’s Bridge,” 95, 127
  British Legation, 66
  Chien Mên gate, 222
  Chihli, in province of, 362, Pref. li.
  Division into two cities, 61
  Dust in, 63
  “House of Eternal Prosperity,” restaurant, 312
  Kambaluk, ancient name for, Pref. xv.
  Llama temple, 119
  Liu-li-chang (street), 224
  Outrages of 1900, Pref. xliv.–lvii.
  _Peking Gazette_, 200
  Races, 237
  Size and population, 64
  Street of Lanterns, 221
  Tê Shêng Mên (Victory gate), 246
  Theatre, 347–355
  Unsuitability of, as capital, Pref. xliv.–liv.
  Walls of, 59, 61

Peter the Great, 212

Pi Yün Ssŭ, summer quarters of British Legation, 80, 87–94, 99, 102–111

Pichon, M., French attaché, 204

Pigs and pork, 134

Pigtails, 7, 34

“Pilgrim’s Progress,” Chinese translation, 271

Pin Chun, mission to England, 226–228

Po Li Nao, Mongolia, 304

“Po-po” sweetmeats, 171, 203

Po-Ting-Qua, Canton merchant, 30

Pogojeff, Dr., Russian Legation, 240, 340

Pok Fo Lum, 15

Polygamy, 359

Population, Peking, 64; Hong-kong, 5; Canton, 24

Portugal, interests in China, 264

“Psalm of Life,” Chinese translation, 70

Pu-ta-jên, Chinese for Sir F. Bruce, 71


Races at Peking, 237; at Tientsing, 50

Rain and snow, prayers for, 88, 209, 217, 314

Rebellion, Tai Ping, 37, 40, 83, 98, 176, 217, Pref. vi.

Religion—
  Ancestor worship and religious rites, 171, 222, 345, Pref.
    xxix.–xxxiv. (see also Monks)
  Buddhism, Pref. xiii. xiv. xix.
  Christianity, history of, in China, Pref. xiv.–xliv. (see also
    Missionaries)
  Mohammedanism, Pref. xiii. xiv.
  Monks and Llamas (see that name)
  Taoism, 374, Pref. xiii.
  Toleration of other creeds, Pref. xii. xxxviii.

Ricci, Father, life and work of, Pref. xviii.–xxii. xxix. xxx. xxxvi.

Rice, term for meals, 138

Roads, 57, 253, 300, 331

Rocks, curious shapes, 323;
  painting on, 324

Ruggiero, Father, Pref. xviii.

Russia, trade with China, 262, 264; partition question, Pref. li.


Sa, mandarin convicted of theft, 218

Saint François Xavier, Pref. xvii.

Salisbury, Lord, policy of, Pref. liv.

San Ko Lin Sin, General, 105, 358

Sangkolinsin, Mongol chief, 59

Saoul, Corea, 206, 207

Saurin, Mr., 50, 91, 128, 150, 188

Scenery—
  Hills near Peking, 86; Hong-kong, 14; between Peking and Great Wall,
    137, 141, 149; Nan-Ko̔u and Pass, 250–254; Mongolia, 274, 286, 295,
    297, 299, 301, 305, 318, 320, 322

Schall, Father, life and work of, Pref. xxiv.–xxvii. xxix. xxxvi.

School, village, 303

Scorpions, 91, 108

Servants, number of, necessary, 92; ability of cooks, 20, 114

Shah-Meen, English quarter of Canton, 30

Shan Hsi, town, 201, 202

Shang Chuen, where St. François Xavier died, Pref. xvii.

Shang Ti, Christian God, Pref. xxvi. xxix.

Shanghai, general description, 37–41; municipal system established by
    Sir R. Alcock, 40

Shantung, insurrection, 83, 98, Pref. vi.; partition question, Pref. l.
    li.

Shao Ching Fu, first Jesuit church established at, Pref. xviii.

Shao-To, 110, 114, 145

Shi Pa Li Tai, Mongolia, 274

Shih, Emperor, builder of the Great Wall, 148

Shih-san-Ling, Ming emperors’ tombs, 156–162, 249

Shi-ling, village, 136

Shops and street life, Peking, 120–126, 309; Canton, 21–24, 31;
    Tientsing, 52

Shou Hu Ying, Mongolia, 302

Shrines, 154, 252, 309

Shui-Hsien-Tszŭ, Mongolia, 295

Shun Chih, Emperor, Pref. xxv.

Shun Tien Fu, town, 362, 373

Skating, 209

Slave-selling described, 241–243

Smallpox, 71, 310

Spain, interests in China, 264

Ssŭ-Chuan, province, 169

Steppes, Mongolia, 274

Street of Lanterns, Peking, 221

Su, Prince of, 171

Sü, Christian convert in seventeenth century, Pref. xx. xxxvi.

Sü Chia Wei, Roman Catholic mission near Shanghai, Pref. xxii.

Suicide, 202, 360

Sun-Ho, near Peking, 129

Superstition a bar to progress, 167

Sweetmeats, Chinese fondness for, 171, 203


Ta-Chio-Ssŭ, summer quarters of British Legation, 330–338

Ta Kao, Mongolia, 324

Ta Liang Ti, Mongolia, 287

Ta Tan, felt factory, Mongolia, 321

Tai Kung, story of, 214

Tai Ping rebellion, 37, 40, 83, 98, 176, 217, Pref. vi.

Taku Forts, 48

Tan Hwa, golden spoon, 373

Tao Kwang, Emperor, 74

Taoism, 374, Pref. xiii.

Tê Shêng Mên, Victory gate, Peking, 246

Tea trade, 4, 97, 272

Telegraph apparatus, attempt to introduce, by Russian Government, 165

Temples—
  “Five Hundred Saints,” Canton, 25
  Hei Lung Tan, 344
  In hills near Peking, 88
  Llama, Peking, 119
  Llama Miao, Mongolia, 290–294
  Lung Wang Miao, 314
  Ma Shên Miao, Mongolia, 286
  Pa Ta Chu, Russian Legation summer quarters, 340
  “Punishments,” Canton, 25
  Ta-chio-Ssŭ, British Legation summer quarters, 330–338
  Wang-ta-jên Miao, Mongolia, 287
  Wo-Fo-Ssŭ, 99

Theatre, Peking, 347–355

Theatricals at British Legation, 216; village, 341

Thieves, cleverness of, 9

Thomas, Mr., expeditions to Corea, 205–208

Thunderstorms, 289, 310

Ti Tsang Wang, a god, 346

Ti-tu, official at Ku Pei Ko̔u, 144–147

Ti̔en, Heaven or God (Christian), Pref. xxvi. xxix. xxxi.–xxxiv.

Ti̔en-Hou, queen of heaven, 154

Tien Wang, chief of Tai Ping rebellion, 217

Tientsing, general description, 50–54

Tournon, Patriarch of Antioch, Pref. xxxiii.

Trade—
  England and America, 263
  Canton, 29
  Opium, Pref. xxxix.–xli.
  Russia, 262, 264
  Shanghai, 37
  Tea, 4, 97, 272
  Tientsing, 53
  Traders, ability of Chinese as, Pref. xxxix.

Travelling—
  Carts, 151, 247, 312
  Hong-kong to Canton, 16
  Hong-kong to Shanghai, 33
  Inns and lodgings, 130, 142, 258, 273, 277–282, 284, 290, 302, 304,
    320, 323, 324, 326, 327
  Mules, 247; mule litters, 316, 325; muleteers, 249, 264, 269–271, 317
  Passport difficulties, 144–147
  Peking to Great Wall, 128–162
  Peking to Mongolia, 246–309, 313–329
  Roads, 57, 253, 300, 331
  Shanghai to Tientsing, 41–50
  Tientsing to Peking, 55
  Yang-tse-Kiang river, 36

Tree cigala, 101

Tsai-shên, god of commerce, 172

Tsao, god of the hearth, 220

Tsêng Kwo Fan, General, 358; Pref. vii.

Tsu Hsi, Empress (reigning), history of, 73 (note); choice of capital,
    Pref. xlvii. xlviii. l. lii.

Tsung-Li-Yamên (Chinese Foreign Office), 181, 190, 240

Tu Mu, town, 255

Tu Shih Kou, Mongolia, 315, 318

Tu-ting, Mongolia, 272

Tuan, Prince, Pref. lii. lvi.

Tung Chi, Emperor, 73 (note)

Tung-Ling, tombs of Ching emperors, 173

Tung-ta-jên, translator of “Psalm of Life,” 69, 70; Preface to
    Wheaton’s _International Law_, 86

Tungchou, 56


Valignani, Father, Pref. xviii.

Verbiest, Father, life and work of, Pref. xxvii.–xxix. xxxvi.

Vlangaly, M., Russian minister, 166


Wade, Mr., _chargé d’affaires_ at Peking, 57, 59, 71

Wampoa, 17

Wan Li, Emperor, Pref. xx.

Wang-ho-lou, Peking racecourse, 237

Wang-ta-jên Miao, Mongol temple, 287

Wei-ta-jên, Chinese for Mr. Wade, 71

Wên Hsiang, Minister of Foreign Affairs, 85, 173

Wên Shên, god of pestilence, 204

Wên Wang, Emperor, 213

Wheaton’s _International Law_, Chinese translation, 86, 175

Williams, Dr. Wells, referred to, 73 (note), 310, Pref. xii. xvii.
    xxiv. xxxi. xxxv.

Wo-Fo-Ssŭ, temple, 99

Wood, scarcity of, 160

Wu Wang, Emperor, 213


Yalu, naval battle of, 358

Yang and Yin, universal principle, 150

Yang Ho, river, 256

Yang Lao Yeh, mandarin in Peking, 229–236

Yang-tse-Kiang, river, 36

Yuen-Ming-Yuen, Imperial summer palace, 111–116, 209

Yun-nan, Pref. li.

Yung Chêng, Emperor, Pref. xxxv.

Yung-Lo, Emperor, 159

Yurt, Mongol hut, 277–282


                                THE END


           _Printed by_ R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, _Edinburgh_.




                               FOOTNOTES

[1] There have been five Tartar dynasties—the Liao, A.D. 907–1125;
the Western Liao, A.D. 1125–1168; the Chin, which came to an end in
A.D. 1234; the Yüan, ending A.D. 1341, and the Ching, or present
dynasty, which began in A.D. 1627. (I have not taken into account some
overlappings of reigns which would need long explanation.)

[2] They are supposed by Mr. Finn “to have belonged to the restoration
from Chaldea, as they had portions of Malachi and Zechariah, adopted
the era of Seleucus, and had many rabbinical customs.” They were found,
by two native Christians sent by Bishop Smith to inquire into their
present condition, to be in abject poverty, ignorance, and dejection.
They knew no Hebrew, but had been instructed in copying the letters of
Holy Writ.—Wells Williams, _Middle Kingdom_, ii. 272.

[3] In those days the jinrikisha had not been invented.

[4] This, be it remembered, was written in 1865, and was the most
desponding view taken at that time even by those who were the gloomiest
prophets.

[5] Pa Li Chiao, the Eight Li Bridge (a Li is about a third of a mile),
so called from its distance from Peking.

[6] Great improvements have been effected in late years.

[7] See Note, p. 73.

[8] This is the more curious, as rice is by no means the staple food of
this part of China. It is bad and dear here, the common fare or staple
of the people being millet—a poor food—to which they add much garlic
for nourishment.

[9] Pulled down in 1864.

[10] The crime of parricide includes high treason, murder of parents,
elders in the family, and of the teacher, in such reverence is learning
held. The murder of a master by an apprentice comes under the same
category. A parricide is said to be an “owl-tiger,” both animals being
supposed to devour their parents. The owl especially eats its mother’s
head and eyes. The laugh of an owl portends death in a family.

[11] They were massacred a year later, their murder leading to the
abortive French expedition against Corea.

[12] In the following year this accomplished and adventurous gentleman
made another trip to Corea in an American ship. Not one of the party
was ever seen again, but a report reached Peking that the Coreans had
burnt the ship with all hands in the river not far from Saoul.

[13] Wang, a prince; Chi̔n Wang, a prince of the first rank who is
personally related to the Emperor.

[14] “Fu,” a bat, by a pun, also means happiness. “Wu fu,” the five
bats, or five happinesses, are a common emblem in Chinese ornamentation.

[15] I must remind the reader that this was written in 1866.

[16] In the far East the dragon, associated in our myths with fire, is
a water spirit. At the miraculous birth of Buddha two heavenly dragons
appeared in the air, the one spouting cold, the other warm water, to
wash the holy babe. Hence bronze dragons are commonly seen in temples
and in other places as water-spouts, where in the West the lion’s head
would be used. The lion as a fountain comes from the ancient Egyptians,
whose astronomers held that the rising of the Nile was bound to take
place when the sun was in Leo.

[17] Alas! both he and Farquhar fell victims to the climate and died of
fever.

[18] See preface.

[19] There are nine official buttons, each denoting an official
rank—each divided into a first and second class. The civilian takes
precedence of the military officer—_cedunt arma togæ_.

[20] Compare the account given of Solomon’s wisdom, 1 Kings iv.
29:—“And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and
largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea-shore. And
Solomon’s wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of the east
country, and all the wisdom of Egypt.... And he spake three thousand
proverbs: and his songs were a thousand and five. And he spake of
trees, from the cedar tree that is in Lebanon even unto the hyssop that
springeth out of the wall: he spake also of beasts, and of fowls, and
of creeping things, and of fishes. And there came of all people to hear
the wisdom of Solomon, from all kings of the earth, which had heard of
his wisdom.”

[21] _The Speculations of the Old Philosopher Lao Tsŭ_, translated by
John Chalmers. London, Trübner and Co.




                       BY A. B. FREEMAN-MITFORD.

            =TALES OF OLD JAPAN.= With Illustrations. Crown
                             8vo, 3s. 6d.

                                 ————

                    _IMPORTANT NEW WORK ON CHINA._

                                =CHINA=

                       =The Long-lived Empire.=

                         BY ELIZA R. SCIDMORE.

With a Portrait of the Empress-Dowager and over 50 other Illustrations.
                     Extra crown 8vo, 8s. 6d. net.

_TIMES._—“Fascinating and instructive.... It is much more than a book
of travel. In her studies of the people, in her character-sketches
of the leading personalities, foreign and native, who fill the stage
of the great Chinese drama, in her quick-witted appreciation of the
political issues at stake, she shows herself an acute and well-informed
observer who has sought diligently for the solution which must underlie
the mystery of a ‘land of contradictions, puzzles, and enigmas.’”

_SPECTATOR._—“The most brilliant and interesting picture of the
long-lived Empire that we are acquainted with.... Her knowledge is
great, her power of pictorial writing remarkable, and her style is full
of light and grace.”

_PILOT._—“A very readable book, crammed with information of many
topics, and telling of many curious sights.”

_PALL MALL GAZETTE._—“A most charming and readable book.... Once taken
up the book is as hard to put down as a good novel.... We cannot too
strongly recommend the perusal of this book to all at the present time.
It will serve as a most admirable commentary to the all-engrossing
events now passing in the Far East. There are many good illustrations.”

_DAILY NEWS._—“The book is to be recommended as a lively and vivid
account of Chinese life and character. With its sketches of scenes
and persons wherewith the entire world is now concerned, ‘China, the
Long-lived Empire’ appears at an opportune moment. It contains a large
number of good illustrations.”

_DAILY CHRONICLE._—“Miss Scidmore unites to the keen and sympathetic
observation of a travelled woman the judicial mind of a veteran judge.
This is high praise, we know, but nobody who has studied China and
reads this book will think it exaggerated.”

_ST. JAMES’S GAZETTE._—“Her book is certain to be widely read, and
it is deserving of study in all respects. The portraits and other
illustrations are extremely interesting.”

                    MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD., LONDON.




                         =MACMILLAN AND CO.’S=

                       =RECENT BOOKS OF TRAVEL=

=Impressions of South Africa.= By the Right Hon. JAMES BRYCE, M.P.,
    Author of “The Holy Roman Empire,” etc. With Three Maps. Third
    Edition, Revised throughout. With a New Prefatory Chapter dealing
    with the Events which have Induced the Present Crisis, and with the
    Text of the Transvaal Conventions of 1881 and 1884. Crown 8vo, 6s.

=South Africa of To-day.= By Captain FRANCIS YOUNGHUSBAND, C.I.E.,
    Indian Staff Corps. With Illustrations. New Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

=From Sea to Sea, and other Sketches.= Letters of Travel. By RUDYARD
    KIPLING. Two Vols. Crown 8vo, 6s. each.

=Notes on Sport and Travel.= By the late GEORGE KINGSLEY, M.D. With
    Introductory Memoir by his daughter, MARY H. KINGSLEY. With
    Portrait. Extra Crown 8vo, 8s. 6d. net.

=The Philippines and Round About=, with some Account of British
    Interests in these Waters. By Major G. J. YOUNGHUSBAND, Queen’s Own
    Corps of Guides, F.R.G.S. With Illustrations and Map. 8vo, 8s. 6d.
    net.

=Nine Years at the Gold Coast.= By the Rev. DENNIS KEMP. With numerous
    Illustrations and Map. 8vo, 12s. 6d. net.

=In the Australian Bush and on the Coast of the Coral Sea.= A
    Naturalist in Australia. By RICHARD SEMON. Numerous Illustrations
    and Maps. Super Royal 8vo, 21s. net.

=The Native Tribes of Central Australia.= By Prof. BALDWIN SPENCER of
    the University of Melbourne and F. J. GILLEN, Sub-Protector of the
    Aborigines. With numerous Illustrations. 8vo, 21s. net.

                    MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD., LONDON.


         —————————————————— End of Book ——————————————————




                   Transcriber’s Note (continued)

Errors in punctuation and simple typos have been corrected without
note. Variations in spelling, hyphenation, capitalisation and accents,
particularly of Chinese names and places, have been left as they appear
in the original publication unless as stated in the following:

  Page  31 – “reburying” changed to “re-burying” (re-burying the dead)

  Page 123 - “cicalas” changed to “cicadas” (live crickets and cicadas)

  Page 152 - “Chi-hsien” changed to “Chih-hsien” (the Chih-hsien, or
              governor of the town)

  Page 302 - “Kang Hsi” changed to “Káng Hsi” (famous Emperor, Káng Hsi)

  Page 318 - “Chang-Ma-Tzû-Chin” changed to “Chang-Ma-Tzŭ-Chin”
              (Chang-Ma-Tzŭ-Chin on the 3rd July)

  Page 336 - “abbott” changed to “abbot” (The abbot himself)

  INDEX - “Chu Jen” changed to “Chü Jên” (Chü Jên, degree)

  INDEX - “Hung Tung Tien” changed to “Hung Tu̔ng Tien” (Hung Tu̔ng Tien,
           Mongolia)

  INDEX - “Shui-Hsien-Tszê” changed to “Shui-Hsien-Tszŭ”
           (Shui-Hsien-Tszŭ, Mongolia, 295)

  INDEX - “Te Shêng Mên” changed to “Tê Shêng Mên” (Tê Shêng Mên,
           Victory gate, Peking)

  INDEX - “Tien” changed to “Ti̔en” (Ti̔en, Heaven or God (Christian))

  INDEX - “Tien-Hou” changed to “Ti̔en-Hou” (Ti̔en-Hou, queen of
           heaven, 154)

  INDEX - “Yung Cheng” changed to “Yung Chêng” (Yung Chêng, Emperor,)

Footnotes have been re-indexed and moved to a FOOTNOTES section after
the INDEX.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ATTACHE AT PEKING ***



Title: All Around the Moon

Author: Jules Verne

Translator: Edward Roth

Release Date: August 6, 2005 [EBook #16457]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALL AROUND THE MOON ***




Produced by Afra Ullah, Taavi Kalju and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net





ALL

AROUND THE MOON

FROM THE FRENCH OF

JULES VERNE

AUTHOR OF "FROM THE EARTH TO THE MOON", "TO THE SUN!" AND "OFF ON A
COMET!"

BY

EDWARD ROTH

ILLUSTRATED

PHILADELPHIA
DAVID MCKAY, PUBLISHER
23 SOUTH NINTH STREET




CONTENTS.

       PRELIMINARY

    I. FROM 10 P.M. TO 10. 46' 40''

   II. THE FIRST HALF HOUR

  III. THEY MAKE THEMSELVES AT HOME AND FEEL QUITE COMFORTABLE

   IV. FOR THE CORNELL GIRLS

    V. THE COLDS OF SPACE

   VI. INSTRUCTIVE CONVERSATION

  VII. A HIGH OLD TIME

 VIII. THE NEUTRAL POINT

   IX. A LITTLE OFF THE TRACK

    X. THE OBSERVERS OF THE MOON

   XI. FACT AND FANCY

  XII. A BIRD'S EYE VIEW OF THE LUNAR MOUNTAINS

 XIII. LUNAR LANDSCAPES

  XIV. A NIGHT OF FIFTEEN DAYS

   XV. GLIMPSES AT THE INVISIBLE

  XVI. THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE

 XVII. TYCHO

XVIII. PUZZLING QUESTIONS

  XIX. IN EVERY FIGHT, THE IMPOSSIBLE WINS

   XX. OFF THE PACIFIC COAST

  XXI. NEWS FOR MARSTON!

 XXII. ON THE WINGS OF THE WIND

XXIII. THE CLUB MEN GO A FISHING

 XXIV. FAREWELL TO THE BALTIMORE GUN CLUB




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

 1. HIS FIRST CARE WAS TO TURN ON THE GAS

 2. DIANA AND SATELLITE

 3. HE HELPED ARDAN TO LIFT BARBICAN

 4. MORE HUNGRY THAN EITHER

 5. THEY DRANK TO THE SPEEDY UNION OF THE EARTH AND HER SATELLITE

 6. DON'T I THOUGH? MY HEAD IS SPLITTING WITH IT!

 7. POOR SATELLITE WAS DROPPED OUT

 8. THE BODY OF THE DOG THROWN OUT YESTERDAY

 9. A DEMONIACAL HULLABALOO

10. THE OXYGEN! HE CRIED

11. A GROUP _à la Jardin Mabille_

12. AN IMMENSE BATTLE-FIELD PILED WITH BLEACHING BONES

13. NEVERTHELESS THE SOLUTION ESCAPED HIM

14. IT'S COLD ENOUGH TO FREEZE A WHITE BEAR

15. THEY COULD UTTER NO WORD, THEY COULD BREATHE NO PRAYER

16. THEY SEEMED HALF ASLEEP IN HIS VITALIZING BEAMS

17. THESE ARCHES EVIDENTLY ONCE BORE THE PIPES OF AN AQUEDUCT

18. ARDAN GAZED AT THE PAIR FOR A FEW MINUTES

19. OLD MAC DISCOVERED TAKING OBSERVATIONS

20. FOR A SECOND ONLY DID THEY CATCH ITS FLASH

21. HOW IS THAT FOR HIGH?

22. EVERYWHERE THEIR DEPARTURE WAS ACCOMPANIED WITH THE MOST TOUCHING
    SYMPATHY




PRELIMINARY CHAPTER,

RESUMING THE FIRST PART OF THE WORK AND SERVING AS AN INTRODUCTION TO
THE SECOND.


A few years ago the world was suddenly astounded by hearing of an
experiment of a most novel and daring nature, altogether unprecedented
in the annals of science. The BALTIMORE GUN CLUB, a society of
artillerymen started in America during the great Civil War, had
conceived the idea of nothing less than establishing direct
communication with the Moon by means of a projectile! President
Barbican, the originator of the enterprise, was strongly encouraged in
its feasibility by the astronomers of Cambridge Observatory, and took
upon himself to provide all the means necessary to secure its success.
Having realized by means of a public subscription the sum of nearly five
and a half millions of dollars, he immediately set himself to work at
the necessary gigantic labors.

In accordance with the Cambridge men's note, the cannon intended to
discharge the projectile was to be planted in some country not further
than 28° north or south from the equator, so that it might be aimed
vertically at the Moon in the zenith. The bullet was to be animated with
an initial velocity of 12,000 yards to the second. It was to be fired
off on the night of December 1st, at thirteen minutes and twenty seconds
before eleven o'clock, precisely. Four days afterwards it was to hit the
Moon, at the very moment that she reached her _perigee_, that is to say,
her nearest point to the Earth, about 228,000 miles distant.

The leading members of the Club, namely President Barbican, Secretary
Marston, Major Elphinstone and General Morgan, forming the executive
committee, held several meetings to discuss the shape and material of
the bullet, the nature and position of the cannon, and the quantity and
quality of the powder. The decision soon arrived at was as follows:
1st--The bullet was to be a hollow aluminium shell, its diameter nine
feet, its walls a foot in thickness, and its weight 19,250 pounds;
2nd--The cannon was to be a columbiad 900 feet in length, a well of that
depth forming the vertical mould in which it was to be cast, and
3rd--The powder was to be 400 thousand pounds of gun cotton, which, by
developing more than 200 thousand millions of cubic feet of gas under
the projectile, would easily send it as far as our satellite.

These questions settled, Barbican, aided by Murphy, the Chief Engineer
of the Cold Spring Iron Works, selected a spot in Florida, near the 27th
degree north latitude, called Stony Hill, where after the performance of
many wonderful feats in mining engineering, the Columbiad was
successfully cast.

Things had reached this state when an incident occurred which excited
the general interest a hundred fold.

A Frenchman from Paris, Michel Ardan by name, eccentric, but keen and
shrewd as well as daring, demanded, by the Atlantic telegraph,
permission to be enclosed in the bullet so that he might be carried to
the Moon, where he was curious to make certain investigations. Received
in America with great enthusiasm, Ardan held a great meeting,
triumphantly carried his point, reconciled Barbican to his mortal foe, a
certain Captain M'Nicholl, and even, by way of clinching the
reconciliation, induced both the newly made friends to join him in his
contemplated trip to the Moon.

The bullet, so modified as to become a hollow conical cylinder with
plenty of room inside, was further provided with powerful water-springs
and readily-ruptured partitions below the floor, intended to deaden the
dreadful concussion sure to accompany the start. It was supplied with
provisions for a year, water for a few months, and gas for nearly two
weeks. A self-acting apparatus, of ingenious construction, kept the
confined atmosphere sweet and healthy by manufacturing pure oxygen and
absorbing carbonic acid. Finally, the Gun Club had constructed, at
enormous expense, a gigantic telescope, which, from the summit of Long's
Peak, could pursue the Projectile as it winged its way through the
regions of space. Everything at last was ready.

On December 1st, at the appointed moment, in the midst of an immense
concourse of spectators, the departure took place, and, for the first
time in the world's history, three human beings quitted our terrestrial
globe with some possibility in their favor of finally reaching a point
of destination in the inter-planetary spaces. They expected to
accomplish their journey in 97 hours, 13 minutes and 20 seconds,
consequently reaching the Lunar surface precisely at midnight on
December 5-6, the exact moment when the Moon would be full.

Unfortunately, the instantaneous explosion of such a vast quantity of
gun-cotton, by giving rise to a violent commotion in the atmosphere,
generated so much vapor and mist as to render the Moon invisible for
several nights to the innumerable watchers in the Western Hemisphere,
who vainly tried to catch sight of her.

In the meantime, J.T. Marston, the Secretary of the Gun Club, and a most
devoted friend of Barbican's, had started for Long's Peak, Colorado, on
the summit of which the immense telescope, already alluded to, had been
erected; it was of the reflecting kind, and possessed power sufficient
to bring the Moon within a distance of five miles. While Marston was
prosecuting his long journey with all possible speed, Professor
Belfast, who had charge of the telescope, was endeavoring to catch a
glimpse of the Projectile, but for a long time with no success. The
hazy, cloudy weather lasted for more than a week, to the great disgust
of the public at large. People even began to fear that further
observation would have to be deferred to the 3d of the following month,
January, as during the latter half of December the waning Moon could not
possibly give light enough to render the Projectile visible.

At last, however, to the unbounded satisfaction of all, a violent
tempest suddenly cleared the sky, and on the 13th of December, shortly
after midnight, the Moon, verging towards her last quarter, revealed
herself sharp and bright on the dark background of the starry firmament.

That same morning, a few hours before Marston's arrival at the summit of
Long's Peak, a very remarkable telegram had been dispatched by Professor
Belfast to the Smithsonian Institute, Washington. It announced:

That on December 13th, at 2 o'clock in the morning, the Projectile shot
from Stony Hill had been perceived by Professor Belfast and his
assistants; that, deflected a little from its course by some unknown
cause, it had not reached its mark, though it had approached near enough
to be affected by the Lunar attraction; and that, its rectilineal motion
having become circular, it should henceforth continue to describe a
regular orbit around the Moon, of which in fact it had become the
Satellite. The dispatch went on further to state:

That the _elements_ of the new heavenly body had not yet been
calculated, as at least three different observations, taken at different
times, were necessary to determine them. The distance of the Projectile
from the Lunar surface, however, might be set down roughly at roughly
2833 miles.

The dispatch concluded with the following hypotheses, positively
pronounced to be the only two possible: Either, 1, The Lunar attraction
would finally prevail, in which case the travellers would reach their
destination; or 2, The Projectile, kept whirling forever in an immutable
orbit, would go on revolving around the Moon till time should be no
more.

In either alternative, what should be the lot of the daring adventurers?
They had, it is true, abundant provisions to last them for some time,
but even supposing that they did reach the Moon and thereby completely
establish the practicability of their daring enterprise, how were they
ever to get back? _Could_ they ever get back? or ever even be heard
from? Questions of this nature, freely discussed by the ablest pens of
the day, kept the public mind in a very restless and excited condition.

We must be pardoned here for making a little remark which, however,
astronomers and other scientific men of sanguine temperament would do
well to ponder over. An observer cannot be too cautious in announcing to
the public his discovery when it is of a nature purely speculative.
Nobody is obliged to discover a planet, or a comet, or even a satellite,
but, before announcing to the world that you have made such a discovery,
first make sure that such is really the fact. Because, you know, should
it afterwards come out that you have done nothing of the kind, you make
yourself a butt for the stupid jokes of the lowest newspaper scribblers.
Belfast had never thought of this. Impelled by his irrepressible rage
for discovery--the _furor inveniendi_ ascribed to all astronomers by
Aurelius Priscus--he had therefore been guilty of an indiscretion highly
un-scientific when his famous telegram, launched to the world at large
from the summit of the Rocky Mountains, pronounced so dogmatically on
the only possible issues of the great enterprise.

The truth was that his telegram contained _two_ very important errors:
1. Error of _observation_, as facts afterwards proved; the Projectile
_was_ not seen on the 13th and _could_ not have been on that day, so
that the little black spot which Belfast professed to have seen was most
certainly not the Projectile; 2. Error of _theory_ regarding the final
fate of the Projectile, since to make it become the Moon's satellite was
flying in the face of one of the great fundamental laws of Theoretical
Mechanics.

Only one, therefore, the first, of the hypotheses so positively
announced, was capable of realization. The travellers--that is to say if
they still lived--might so combine and unite their own efforts with
those of the Lunar attraction as actually to succeed at last in reaching
the Moon's surface.

Now the travellers, those daring but cool-headed men who knew very well
what they were about, _did_ still live, they _had_ survived the
frightful concussion of the start, and it is to the faithful record of
their wonderful trip in the bullet-car, with all its singular and
dramatic details, that the present volume is devoted. The story may
destroy many illusions, prejudices and conjectures; but it will at least
give correct ideas of the strange incidents to which such an enterprise
is exposed, and it will certainly bring out in strong colors the effects
of Barbican's scientific conceptions, M'Nicholl's mechanical resources,
and Ardan's daring, eccentric, but brilliant and effective combinations.

Besides, it will show that J.T. Marston, their faithful friend and a man
every way worthy of the friendship of such men, was only losing his time
while mirroring the Moon in the speculum of the gigantic telescope on
that lofty peak of the mountains.




CHAPTER I.

FROM 10 P.M. TO 10 46' 40''.


The moment that the great clock belonging to the works at Stony Hill had
struck ten, Barbican, Ardan and M'Nicholl began to take their last
farewells of the numerous friends surrounding them. The two dogs
intended to accompany them had been already deposited in the Projectile.
The three travellers approached the mouth of the enormous cannon, seated
themselves in the flying car, and once more took leave for the last time
of the vast throng standing in silence around them. The windlass
creaked, the car started, and the three daring men disappeared in the
yawning gulf.

The trap-hole giving them ready access to the interior of the
Projectile, the car soon came back empty; the great windlass was
presently rolled away; the tackle and scaffolding were removed, and in a
short space of time the great mouth of the Columbiad was completely rid
of all obstructions.

M'Nicholl took upon himself to fasten the door of the trap on the inside
by means of a powerful combination of screws and bolts of his own
invention. He also covered up very carefully the glass lights with
strong iron plates of extreme solidity and tightly fitting joints.

Ardan's first care was to turn on the gas, which he found burning rather
low; but he lit no more than one burner, being desirous to economize as
much as possible their store of light and heat, which, as he well knew,
could not at the very utmost last them longer than a few weeks.

Under the cheerful blaze, the interior of the Projectile looked like a
comfortable little chamber, with its circular sofa, nicely padded walls,
and dome shaped ceiling.

All the articles that it contained, arms, instruments, utensils, etc.,
were solidly fastened to the projections of the wadding, so as to
sustain the least injury possible from the first terrible shock. In
fact, all precautions possible, humanly speaking, had been taken to
counteract this, the first, and possibly one of the very greatest
dangers to which the courageous adventurers would be exposed.

Ardan expressed himself to be quite pleased with the appearance of
things in general.

"It's a prison, to be sure," said he "but not one of your ordinary
prisons that always keep in the one spot. For my part, as long as I can
have the privilege of looking out of the window, I am willing to lease
it for a hundred years. Ah! Barbican, that brings out one of your stony
smiles. You think our lease may last longer than that! Our tenement may
become our coffin, eh? Be it so. I prefer it anyway to Mahomet's; it may
indeed float in the air, but it won't be motionless as a milestone!"

[Illustration: TURN ON THE GAS.]

Barbican, having made sure by personal inspection that everything was in
perfect order, consulted his chronometer, which he had carefully set a
short time before with Chief Engineer Murphy's, who had been charged to
fire off the Projectile.

"Friends," he said, "it is now twenty minutes past ten. At 10 46' 40'',
precisely, Murphy will send the electric current into the gun-cotton. We
have, therefore, twenty-six minutes more to remain on earth."

"Twenty-six minutes and twenty seconds," observed Captain M'Nicholl, who
always aimed at mathematical precision.

"Twenty-six minutes!" cried Ardan, gaily. "An age, a cycle, according to
the use you make of them. In twenty-six minutes how much can be done!
The weightiest questions of warfare, politics, morality, can be
discussed, even decided, in twenty-six minutes. Twenty-six minutes well
spent are infinitely more valuable than twenty-six lifetimes wasted! A
few seconds even, employed by a Pascal, or a Newton, or a Barbican, or
any other profoundly intellectual being

    Whose thoughts wander through eternity--"

"As mad as Marston! Every bit!" muttered the Captain, half audibly.

"What do you conclude from this rigmarole of yours?" interrupted
Barbican.

"I conclude that we have twenty-six good minutes still left--"

"Only twenty-four minutes, ten seconds," interrupted the Captain, watch
in hand.

"Well, twenty-four minutes, Captain," Ardan went on; "now even in
twenty-four minutes, I maintain--"

"Ardan," interrupted Barbican, "after a very little while we shall have
plenty of time for philosophical disputations. Just now let us think of
something far more pressing."

"More pressing! what do you mean? are we not fully prepared?"

"Yes, fully prepared, as far at least as we have been able to foresee.
But we may still, I think, possibly increase the number of precautions
to be taken against the terrible shock that we are so soon to
experience."

"What? Have you any doubts whatever of the effectiveness of your
brilliant and extremely original idea? Don't you think that the layers
of water, regularly disposed in easily-ruptured partitions beneath this
floor, will afford us sufficient protection by their elasticity?"

"I hope so, indeed, my dear friend, but I am by no means confident."

"He hopes! He is by no means confident! Listen to that, Mac! Pretty time
to tell us so! Let me out of here!"

"Too late!" observed the Captain quietly. "The trap-hole alone would
take ten or fifteen minutes to open."

"Oh then I suppose I must make the best of it," said Ardan, laughing.
"All aboard, gentlemen! The train starts in twenty minutes!"

"In nineteen minutes and eighteen seconds," said the Captain, who never
took his eye off the chronometer.

The three travellers looked at each other for a little while, during
which even Ardan appeared to become serious. After another careful
glance at the several objects lying around them, Barbican said, quietly:

"Everything is in its place, except ourselves. What we have now to do is
to decide on the position we must take in order to neutralize the shock
as much as possible. We must be particularly careful to guard against a
rush of blood to the head."

"Correct!" said the Captain.

"Suppose we stood on our heads, like the circus tumblers!" cried Ardan,
ready to suit the action to the word.

"Better than that," said Barbican; "we can lie on our side. Keep clearly
in mind, dear friends, that at the instant of departure it makes very
little difference to us whether we are inside the bullet or in front of
it. There is, no doubt, _some_ difference," he added, seeing the great
eyes made by his friends, "but it is exceedingly little."

"Thank heaven for the _some_!" interrupted Ardan, fervently.

"Don't you approve of my suggestion, Captain?" asked Barbican.

"Certainly," was the hasty reply. "That is to say, absolutely.
Seventeen minutes twenty-seven seconds!"

"Mac isn't a human being at all!" cried Ardan, admiringly. "He is a
repeating chronometer, horizontal escapement, London-made lever, capped,
jewelled,--"

His companions let him run on while they busied themselves in making
their last arrangements, with the greatest coolness and most systematic
method. In fact, I don't think of anything just now to compare them to
except a couple of old travellers who, having to pass the night in the
train, are trying to make themselves as comfortable as possible for
their long journey. In your profound astonishment, you may naturally ask
me of what strange material can the hearts of these Americans be made,
who can view without the slightest semblance of a flutter the approach
of the most appalling dangers? In your curiosity I fully participate,
but, I'm sorry to say, I can't gratify it. It is one of those things
that I could never find out.

Three mattresses, thick and well wadded, spread on the disc forming the
false bottom of the Projectile, were arranged in lines whose parallelism
was simply perfect. But Ardan would never think of occupying his until
the very last moment. Walking up and down, with the restless nervousness
of a wild beast in a cage, he kept up a continuous fire of talk; at one
moment with his friends, at another with the dogs, addressing the latter
by the euphonious and suggestive names of Diana and Satellite.

[Illustration: DIANA AND SATELLITE.]

"Ho, pets!" he would exclaim as he patted them gently, "you must not
forget the noble part you are to play up there. You must be models of
canine deportment. The eyes of the whole Selenitic world will be upon
you. You are the standard bearers of your race. From you they will
receive their first impression regarding its merits. Let it be a
favorable one. Compel those Selenites to acknowledge, in spite of
themselves, that the terrestrial race of canines is far superior to that
of the very best Moon dog among them!"

"Dogs in the Moon!" sneered M'Nicholl, "I like that!"

"Plenty of dogs!" cried Ardan, "and horses too, and cows, and sheep, and
no end of chickens!"

"A hundred dollars to one there isn't a single chicken within the whole
Lunar realm, not excluding even the invisible side!" cried the Captain,
in an authoritative tone, but never taking his eye off the chronometer.

"I take that bet, my son," coolly replied Ardan, shaking the Captain's
hand by way of ratifying the wager; "and this reminds me, by the way,
Mac, that you have lost three bets already, to the pretty little tune of
six thousand dollars."

"And paid them, too!" cried the captain, monotonously; "ten, thirty-six,
six!"

"Yes, and in a quarter of an hour you will have to pay nine thousand
dollars more; four thousand because the Columbiad will not burst, and
five thousand because the Projectile will rise more than six miles from
the Earth."

"I have the money ready," answered the Captain, touching his breeches
pocket. "When I lose I pay. Not sooner. Ten, thirty-eight, ten!"

"Captain, you're a man of method, if there ever was one. I think,
however, that you made a mistake in your wagers."

"How so?" asked the Captain listlessly, his eye still on the dial.

"Because, by Jove, if you win there will be no more of you left to take
the money than there will be of Barbican to pay it!"

"Friend Ardan," quietly observed Barbican, "my stakes are deposited in
the _Wall Street Bank_, of New York, with orders to pay them over to the
Captain's heirs, in case the Captain himself should fail to put in an
appearance at the proper time."

"Oh! you rhinoceroses, you pachyderms, you granite men!" cried Ardan,
gasping with surprise; "you machines with iron heads, and iron hearts! I
may admire you, but I'm blessed if I understand you!"

"Ten, forty-two, ten!" repeated M'Nicholl, as mechanically as if it was
the chronometer itself that spoke.

"Four minutes and a half more," said Barbican.

"Oh! four and a half little minutes!" went on Ardan. "Only think of it!
We are shut up in a bullet that lies in the chamber of a cannon nine
hundred feet long. Underneath this bullet is piled a charge of 400
thousand pounds of gun-cotton, equivalent to 1600 thousand pounds of
ordinary gunpowder! And at this very instant our friend Murphy,
chronometer in hand, eye on dial, finger on discharger, is counting the
last seconds and getting ready to launch us into the limitless regions
of planetary--"

"Ardan, dear friend," interrupted Barbican, in a grave tone, "a serious
moment is now at hand. Let us meet it with some interior recollection.
Give me your hands, my dear friends."

"Certainly," said Ardan, with tears in his voice, and already at the
other extreme of his apparent levity.

The three brave men united in one last, silent, but warm and impulsively
affectionate pressure.

"And now, great God, our Creator, protect us! In Thee we trust!" prayed
Barbican, the others joining him with folded hands and bowed heads.

"Ten, forty-six!" whispered the Captain, as he and Ardan quietly took
their places on the mattresses.

Only forty seconds more!

Barbican rapidly extinguishes the gas and lies down beside his
companions.

The deathlike silence now reigning in the Projectile is interrupted only
by the sharp ticking of the chronometer as it beats the seconds.

Suddenly, a dreadful shock is felt, and the Projectile, shot up by the
instantaneous development of 200,000 millions of cubic feet of gas, is
flying into space with inconceivable rapidity!




CHAPTER II.

THE FIRST HALF HOUR.


What had taken place within the Projectile? What effect had been
produced by the frightful concussion? Had Barbican's ingenuity been
attended with a fortunate result? Had the shock been sufficiently
deadened by the springs, the buffers, the water layers, and the
partitions so readily ruptured? Had their combined effect succeeded in
counteracting the tremendous violence of a velocity of 12,000 yards a
second, actually sufficient to carry them from London to New York in six
minutes? These, and a hundred other questions of a similar nature were
asked that night by the millions who had been watching the explosion
from the base of Stony Hill. Themselves they forgot altogether for the
moment; they forgot everything in their absorbing anxiety regarding the
fate of the daring travellers. Had one among them, our friend Marston,
for instance, been favored with a glimpse at the interior of the
projectile, what would he have seen?

Nothing at all at first, on account of the darkness; except that the
walls had solidly resisted the frightful shock. Not a crack, nor a bend,
nor a dent could be perceived; not even the slightest injury had the
admirably constructed piece of mechanical workmanship endured. It had
not yielded an inch to the enormous pressure, and, far from melting and
falling back to earth, as had been so seriously apprehended, in showers
of blazing aluminium, it was still as strong in every respect as it had
been on the very day that it left the Cold Spring Iron Works, glittering
like a silver dollar.

Of real damage there was actually none, and even the disorder into which
things had been thrown in the interior by the violent shock was
comparatively slight. A few small objects lying around loose had been
furiously hurled against the ceiling, but the others appeared not to
have suffered the slightest injury. The straps that fastened them up
were unfrayed, and the fixtures that held them down were uncracked.

The partitions beneath the disc having been ruptured, and the water
having escaped, the false floor had been dashed with tremendous violence
against the bottom of the Projectile, and on this disc at this moment
three human bodies could be seen lying perfectly still and motionless.

Were they three corpses? Had the Projectile suddenly become a great
metallic coffin bearing its ghastly contents through the air with the
rapidity of a lightning flash?

In a very few minutes after the shock, one of the bodies stirred a
little, the arms moved, the eyes opened, the head rose and tried to look
around; finally, with some difficulty, the body managed to get on its
knees. It was the Frenchman! He held his head tightly squeezed between
his hands for some time as if to keep it from splitting. Then he felt
himself rapidly all over, cleared his throat with a vigorous "hem!"
listened to the sound critically for an instant, and then said to
himself in a relieved tone, but in his native tongue:

"One man all right! Call the roll for the others!"

He tried to rise, but the effort was too great for his strength. He fell
back again, his brain swimming, his eyes bursting, his head splitting.
His state very much resembled that of a young man waking up in the
morning after his first tremendous "spree."

"Br--rr!" he muttered to himself, still talking French; "this reminds me
of one of my wild nights long ago in the _Quartier Latin_, only
decidedly more so!"

Lying quietly on his back for a while, he could soon feel that the
circulation of his blood, so suddenly and violently arrested by the
terrific shock, was gradually recovering its regular flow; his heart
grew more normal in its action; his head became clearer, and the pain
less distracting.

"Time to call that roll," he at last exclaimed in a voice with some
pretensions to firmness; "Barbican! MacNicholl!"

He listens anxiously for a reply. None comes. A snow-wrapt grave at
midnight is not more silent. In vain does he try to catch even the
faintest sound of breathing, though he listens intently enough to hear
the beating of their hearts; but he hears only his own.

"Call that roll again!" he mutters in a voice far less assured than
before; "Barbican! MacNicholl!"

The same fearful unearthly stillness.

"The thing is getting decidedly monotonous!" he exclaimed, still
speaking French. Then rapidly recovering his consciousness as the full
horror of the situation began to break on his mind, he went on muttering
audibly: "Have they really hopped the twig? Bah! Fudge! what has not
been able to knock the life out of one little Frenchman can't have
killed two Americans! They're all right! But first and foremost, let us
enlighten the situation!"

So saying, he contrived without much difficulty to get on his feet.
Balancing himself then for a moment, he began groping about for the gas.
But he stopped suddenly.

"Hold on a minute!" he cried; "before lighting this match, let us see if
the gas has been escaping. Setting fire to a mixture of air and hydrogen
would make a pretty how-do-you-do! Such an explosion would infallibly
burst the Projectile, which so far seems all right, though I'm blest if
I can tell whether we're moving or not."

He began sniffing and smelling to discover if possible the odor of
escaped gas. He could not detect the slightest sign of anything of the
kind. This gave him great courage. He knew of course that his senses
were not yet in good order, still he thought he might trust them so far
as to be certain that the gas had not escaped and that consequently all
the other receptacles were uninjured.

At the touch of the match, the gas burst into light and burned with a
steady flame. Ardan immediately bent anxiously over the prostrate bodies
of his friends. They lay on each other like inert masses, M'Nicholl
stretched across Barbican.

Ardan first lifted up the Captain, laid him on the sofa, opened his
clenched hands, rubbed them, and slapped the palms vigorously. Then he
went all over the body carefully, kneading it, rubbing it, and gently
patting it. In such intelligent efforts to restore suspended
circulation, he seemed perfectly at home, and after a few minutes his
patience was rewarded by seeing the Captain's pallid face gradually
recover its natural color, and by feeling his heart gradually beat with
a firm pulsation.

At last M'Nicholl opened his eyes, stared at Ardan for an instant,
pressed his hand, looked around searchingly and anxiously, and at last
whispered in a faint voice:

"How's Barbican?"

"Barbican is all right, Captain," answered Ardan quietly, but still
speaking French. "I'll attend to him in a jiffy. He had to wait for his
turn. I began with you because you were the top man. We'll see in a
minute what we can do for dear old Barby (_ce cher Barbican_)!"

In less than thirty seconds more, the Captain not only was able to sit
up himself, but he even insisted on helping Ardan to lift Barbican,
and deposit him gently on the sofa.

[Illustration: HELPED ARDAN TO LIFT BARBICAN.]

The poor President had evidently suffered more from the concussion than
either of his companions. As they took off his coat they were at first
terribly shocked at the sight of a great patch of blood staining his
shirt bosom, but they were inexpressibly relieved at finding that it
proceeded from a slight contusion of the shoulder, little more than skin
deep.

Every approved operation that Ardan had performed for the Captain, both
now repeated for Barbican, but for a long time with nothing like a
favorable result.

Ardan at first tried to encourage the Captain by whispers of a lively
and hopeful nature, but not yet understanding why M'Nicholl did not
deign to make a single reply, he grew reserved by degrees and at last
would not speak a single word. He worked at Barbican, however, just as
before.

M'Nicholl interrupted himself every moment to lay his ear on the breast
of the unconscious man. At first he had shaken his head quite
despondingly, but by degrees he found himself more and more encouraged
to persist.

"He breathes!" he whispered at last.

"Yes, he has been breathing for some time," replied Ardan, quietly,
still unconsciously speaking French. "A little more rubbing and pulling
and pounding will make him as spry as a young grasshopper."

They worked at him, in fact, so vigorously, intelligently and
perseveringly, that, after what they considered a long hour's labor,
they had the delight of seeing the pale face assume a healthy hue, the
inert limbs give signs of returning animation, and the breathing become
strong and regular.

At last, Barbican suddenly opened his eyes, started into an upright
position on the sofa, took his friends by the hands, and, in a voice
showing complete consciousness, demanded eagerly:

"Ardan, M'Nicholl, are we moving?"

His friends looked at each other, a little amused, but more perplexed.
In their anxiety regarding their own and their friend's recovery, they
had never thought of asking such a question. His words recalled them at
once to a full sense of their situation.

"Moving? Blessed if I can tell!" said Ardan, still speaking French.

"We may be lying fifty feet deep in a Florida marsh, for all I know,"
observed M'Nicholl.

"Or, likely as not, in the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico," suggested
Ardan, still in French.

"Suppose we find out," observed Barbican, jumping up to try, his voice
as clear and his step as firm as ever.

But trying is one thing, and finding out another. Having no means of
comparing themselves with external objects, they could not possibly tell
whether they were moving, or at an absolute stand-still. Though our
Earth is whirling us continually around the Sun at the tremendous speed
of 500 miles a minute, its inhabitants are totally unconscious of the
slightest motion. It was the same with our travellers. Through their own
personal consciousness they could tell absolutely nothing. Were they
shooting through space like a meteor? They could not tell. Had they
fallen back and buried themselves deep in the sandy soil of Florida, or,
still more likely, hundreds of fathoms deep beneath the waters of the
Gulf of Mexico? They could not form the slightest idea.

Listening evidently could do no good. The profound silence proved
nothing. The padded walls of the Projectile were too thick to admit any
sound whether of wind, water, or human beings. Barbican, however, was
soon struck forcibly by one circumstance. He felt himself to be very
uncomfortably warm, and his friend's faces looked very hot and flushed.
Hastily removing the cover that protected the thermometer, he closely
inspected it, and in an instant uttered a joyous exclamation.

"Hurrah!" he cried. "We're moving! There's no mistake about it. The
thermometer marks 113 degrees Fahrenheit. Such a stifling heat could not
come from the gas. It comes from the exterior walls of our projectile,
which atmospheric friction must have made almost red hot. But this heat
must soon diminish, because we are already far beyond the regions of the
atmosphere, so that instead of smothering we shall be shortly in danger
of freezing."

"What?" asked Ardan, much bewildered. "We are already far beyond the
limits of the terrestrial atmosphere! Why do you think so?"

M'Nicholl was still too much flustered to venture a word.

"If you want me to answer your question satisfactorily, my dear Ardan,"
replied Barbican, with a quiet smile, "you will have the kindness to put
your questions in English."

"What do you mean, Barbican!" asked Ardan, hardly believing his ears.

"Hurrah!" cried M'Nicholl, in the tone of a man who has suddenly made a
welcome but most unexpected discovery.

"I don't know exactly how it is with the Captain," continued Barbican,
with the utmost tranquillity, "but for my part the study of the
languages never was my strong point, and though I always admired the
French, and even understood it pretty well, I never could converse in it
without giving myself more trouble than I always find it convenient to
assume."

"You don't mean to say that I have been talking French to you all this
time!" cried Ardan, horror-stricken.

"The most elegant French I ever heard, backed by the purest Parisian
accent," replied Barbican, highly amused; "Don't you think so, Captain?"
he added, turning to M'Nicholl, whose countenance still showed the most
comical traces of bewilderment.

"Well, I swan to man!" cried the Captain, who always swore a little
when his feelings got beyond his control; "Ardan, the Boss has got the
rig on both of us this time, but rough as it is on you it is a darned
sight more so on me. Be hanged if I did not think you were talking
English the whole time, and I put the whole blame for not understanding
you on the disordered state of my brain!"

Ardan only stared, and scratched his head, but Barbican actually--no,
not _laughed_, that serene nature could not _laugh_. His cast-iron
features puckered into a smile of the richest drollery, and his eyes
twinkled with the wickedest fun; but no undignified giggle escaped the
portal of those majestic lips.

"It _sounds_ like French, I'd say to myself," continued the Captain,
"but I _know_ it's English, and by and by, when this whirring goes out
of my head, I shall easily understand it."

Ardan now looked as if he was beginning to see the joke.

"The most puzzling part of the thing to me," went on M'Nicholl, giving
his experience with the utmost gravity, "was why English sounded so like
_French_. If it was simple incomprehensible gibberish, I could readily
blame the state of my ears for it. But the idea that my bothered ears
could turn a mere confused, muzzled, buzzing reverberation into a sweet,
harmonious, articulate, though unintelligible, human language, made me
sure that I was fast becoming crazy, if I was not so already."

"Ha! ha! ha!" roared Ardan, laughing till the tears came. "Now I
understand why the poor Captain made me no reply all the time, and
looked at me with such a hapless woe-begone expression of countenance.
The fact is, Barbican, that shock was too much both for M'Nicholl and
myself. You are the only man among us whose head is fire-proof,
blast-proof, and powder-proof. I really believe a burglar would have
greater difficulty in blowing your head-piece open than in bursting one
of those famous American safes your papers make such a fuss about. A
wonderful head, the Boss's, isn't it M'Nicholl?"

"Yes," said the Captain, as slowly as if every word were a gem of the
profoundest thought, "the Boss has a fearful and a wonderful head!"

"But now to business!" cried the versatile Ardan, "Why do you think,
Barbican, that we are at present beyond the limits of the terrestrial
atmosphere?"

"For a very simple reason," said Barbican, pointing to the chronometer;
"it is now more than seven minutes after 11. We must, therefore, have
been in motion more than twenty minutes. Consequently, unless our
initial velocity has been very much diminished by the friction, we must
have long before this completely cleared the fifty miles of atmosphere
enveloping the earth."

"Correct," said the Captain, cool as a cucumber, because once more in
complete possession of all his senses; "but how much do you think the
initial velocity to have been diminished by the friction?"

"By a third, according to my calculations," replied Barbican, "which I
think are right. Supposing our initial velocity, therefore, to have been
12,000 yards per second, by the time we quitted the atmosphere it must
have been reduced to 8,000 yards per second. At that rate, we must have
gone by this time--"

"Then, Mac, my boy, you've lost your two bets!" interrupted Ardan. "The
Columbiad has not burst, four thousand dollars; the Projectile has risen
at least six miles, five thousand dollars; come, Captain, bleed!"

"Let me first be sure we're right," said the Captain, quietly. "I don't
deny, you see, that friend Barbican's arguments are quite right, and,
therefore, that I have lost my nine thousand dollars. But there is
another view of the case possible, which might annul the bet."

"What other view?" asked Barbican, quickly.

"Suppose," said the Captain, very drily, "that the powder had not
caught, and that we were still lying quietly at the bottom of the
Columbiad!"

"By Jove!" laughed Ardan, "there's an idea truly worthy of my own
nondescript brain! We must surely have changed heads during that
concussion! No matter, there is some sense left in us yet. Come now,
Captain, consider a little, if you can. Weren't we both half-killed by
the shock? Didn't I rescue you from certain death with these two hands?
Don't you see Barbican's shoulder still bleeding by the violence of the
shock?"

"Correct, friend Michael, correct in every particular," replied the
Captain, "But one little question."

"Out with it!"

"Friend Michael, you say we're moving?"

"Yes."

"In consequence of the explosion?"

"Certainly!"

"Which must have been attended with a tremendous report?"

"Of course!"

"Did you hear that report, friend Michael?"

"N--o," replied Ardan, a little disconcerted at the question. "Well, no;
I can't say that I did hear any report."

"Did you, friend Barbican?"

"No," replied Barbican, promptly. "I heard no report whatever."

His answer was ready, but his look was quite as disconcerted as Ardan's.

"Well, friend Barbican and friend Michael," said the Captain, very drily
as he leered wickedly at both, "put that and that together and tell me
what you make of it."

"It's a fact!" exclaimed Barbican, puzzled, but not bewildered. "Why did
we not hear that report?"

"Too hard for me," said Ardan. "Give it up!"

The three friends gazed at each other for a while with countenances
expressive of much perplexity. Barbican appeared to be the least
self-possessed of the party. It was a complete turning of the tables
from the state of things a few moments ago. The problem was certainly
simple enough, but for that very reason the more inexplicable. If they
were moving the explosion must have taken place; but if the explosion
had taken place, why had they not heard the report?

Barbican's decision soon put an end to speculation.

"Conjecture being useless," said he, "let us have recourse to facts.
First, let us see where we are. Drop the deadlights!"

This operation, simple enough in itself and being immediately undertaken
by the whole three, was easily accomplished. The screws fastening the
bolts by which the external plates of the deadlights were solidly
pinned, readily yielded to the pressure of a powerful wrench. The bolts
were then driven outwards, and the holes which had contained them were
immediately filled with solid plugs of India rubber. The bolts once
driven out, the external plates dropped by their own weight, turning on
a hinge, like portholes, and the strong plate-glass forming the light
immediately showed itself. A second light exactly similar, could be
cleared away on the opposite side of the Projectile; a third, on the
summit of the dome, and a fourth, in the centre of the bottom. The
travellers could thus take observations in four different directions,
having an opportunity of gazing at the firmament through the side
lights, and at the Earth and the Moon through the lower and the upper
lights of the Projectile.

Ardan and the Captain had commenced examining the floor, previous to
operating on the bottom light. But Barbican was the first to get through
his work at one of the side lights, and M'Nicholl and Ardan soon heard
him shouting:

"No, my friends!" he exclaimed, in tones of decided emotion; "we have
_not_ fallen back to Earth; nor are we lying in the bottom of the Gulf
of Mexico. No! We are driving through space! Look at the stars
glittering all around! Brighter, but smaller than we have ever seen them
before! We have left the Earth and the Earth's atmosphere far behind
us!"

"Hurrah! Hurrah!" cried M'Nicholl and Ardan, feeling as if electric
shocks were coursing through them, though they could see nothing,
looking down from the side light, but the blackest and profoundest
obscurity.

Barbican soon convinced them that this pitchy blackness proved that they
were not, and could not be, reposing on the surface of the Earth, where
at that moment, everything was illuminated by the bright moonlight; also
that they had passed the different layers of the atmosphere, where the
diffused and refracted rays would be also sure to reveal themselves
through the lights of the Projectile. They were, therefore, certainly
moving. No doubt was longer possible.

"It's a fact!" observed the Captain, now quite convinced. "Then I've
lost!"

"Let me congratulate you!" cried Ardan, shaking his hand.

"Here is your nine thousand dollars, friend Barbican," said the Captain,
taking a roll of greenbacks of high denomination out of his
porte-monnaie.

"You want a receipt, don't you, Captain?" asked Barbican, counting the
money.

"Yes, I should prefer one, if it is not too much trouble," answered
M'Nicholl; "it saves dispute."

Coolly and mechanically, as if seated at his desk, in his office,
Barbican opened his memorandum book, wrote a receipt on a blank page,
dated, signed and sealed it, and then handed it to the Captain, who put
it away carefully among the other papers of his portfolio.

Ardan, taking off his hat, made a profound bow to both of his
companions, without saying a word. Such formality, under such
extraordinary circumstances, actually paralysed his tongue for the
moment. No wonder that he could not understand those Americans. Even
Indians would have surprised him by an exhibition of such stoicism.
After indulging in silent wonder for a minute or two, he joined his
companions who were now busy looking out at the starry sky.

"Where is the Moon?" he asked. "How is it that we cannot see her?"

"The fact of our not seeing her," answered Barbican, "gives me very
great satisfaction in one respect; it shows that our Projectile was shot
so rapidly out of the Columbiad that it had not time to be impressed
with the slightest revolving motion--for us a most fortunate matter. As
for the rest--see, there is _Cassiopeia_, a little to the left is
_Andromeda_, further down is the great square of _Pegasus_, and to the
southwest _Fomalhaut_ can be easily seen swallowing the _Cascade_. All
this shows we are looking west and consequently cannot see the Moon,
which is approaching the zenith from the east. Open the other light--But
hold on! Look here! What can this be?"

The three travellers, looking westwardly in the direction of _Alpherat_,
saw a brilliant object rapidly approaching them. At a distance, it
looked like a dusky moon, but the side turned towards the Earth blazed
with a bright light, which every moment became more intense. It came
towards them with prodigious velocity and, what was worse, its path lay
so directly in the course of the Projectile that a collision seemed
inevitable. As it moved onward, from west to east, they could easily see
that it rotated on its axis, like all heavenly bodies; in fact, it
somewhat resembled a Moon on a small scale, describing its regular orbit
around the Earth.

"_Mille tonerres!_" cried Ardan, greatly excited; "what is that? Can it
be another projectile?" M'Nicholl, wiping his spectacles, looked again,
but made no reply. Barbican looked puzzled and uneasy. A collision was
quite possible, and the results, even if not frightful in the highest
degree, must be extremely deplorable. The Projectile, if not absolutely
dashed to pieces, would be diverted from its own course and dragged
along in a new one in obedience to the irresistible attraction of this
furious asteroid.

Barbican fully realized that either alternative involved the complete
failure of their enterprise. He kept perfectly still, but, never losing
his presence of mind, he curiously looked on the approaching object with
a gladiatorial eye, as if seeking to detect some unguarded point in his
terrible adversary. The Captain was equally silent; he looked like a man
who had fully made up his mind to regard every possible contingency with
the most stoical indifference. But Ardan's tongue, more fluent than
ever, rattled away incessantly.

"Look! Look!" he exclaimed, in tones so perfectly expressive of his
rapidly alternating feelings as to render the medium of words totally
unnecessary. "How rapidly the cursed thing is nearing us! Plague take
your ugly phiz, the more I know you, the less I like you! Every second
she doubles in size! Come, Madame Projectile! Stir your stumps a little
livelier, old lady! He's making for you as straight as an arrow! We're
going right in his way, or he's coming in ours, I can't say which. It's
taking a mean advantage of us either way. As for ourselves--what can
_we_ do! Before such a monster as that we are as helpless as three men
in a little skiff shooting down the rapids to the brink of Niagara! Now
for it!"

Nearer and nearer it came, but without noise, without sparks, without a
trail, though its lower part was brighter than ever. Its path lying
little above them, the nearer it came the more the collision seemed
inevitable. Imagine yourself caught on a narrow railroad bridge at
midnight with an express train approaching at full speed, its reflector
already dazzling you with its light, the roar of the cars rattling in
your ears, and you may conceive the feelings of the travellers. At last
it was so near that the travellers started back in affright, with eyes
shut, hair on end, and fully believing their last hour had come. Even
then Ardan had his _mot_.

"We can neither switch off, down brakes, nor clap on more steam! Hard
luck!"

In an instant all was over. The velocity of the Projectile was
fortunately great enough to carry it barely above the dangerous point;
and in a flash the terrible bolide disappeared rapidly several hundred
yards beneath the affrighted travellers.

"Good bye! And may you never come back!" cried Ardan, hardly able to
breathe. "It's perfectly outrageous! Not room enough in infinite space
to let an unpretending bullet like ours move about a little without
incurring the risk of being run over by such a monster as that! What is
it anyhow? Do you know, Barbican?"

"I do," was the reply.

"Of course, you do! What is it that he don't know? Eh, Captain?"

"It is a simple bolide, but one of such enormous dimensions that the
Earth's attraction has made it a satellite."

"What!" cried Ardan, "another satellite besides the Moon? I hope there
are no more of them!"

"They are pretty numerous," replied Barbican; "but they are so small and
they move with such enormous velocity that they are very seldom seen.
Petit, the Director of the Observatory of Toulouse, who these last years
has devoted much time and care to the observation of bolides, has
calculated that the very one we have just encountered moves with such
astonishing swiftness that it accomplishes its revolution around the
Earth in about 3 hours and 20 minutes!"

"Whew!" whistled Ardan, "where should we be now if it had struck us!"

"You don't mean to say, Barbican," observed M'Nicholl, "that Petit has
seen this very one?"

"So it appears," replied Barbican.

"And do all astronomers admit its existence?" asked the Captain.

"Well, some of them have their doubts," replied Barbican--

"If the unbelievers had been here a minute or two ago," interrupted
Ardan, "they would never express a doubt again."

"If Petit's calculation is right," continued Barbican, "I can even form
a very good idea as to our distance from the Earth."

"It seems to me Barbican can do what he pleases here or elsewhere,"
observed Ardan to the Captain.

"Let us see, Barbican," asked M'Nicholl; "where has Petit's calculation
placed us?"

"The bolide's distance being known," replied Barbican, "at the moment we
met it we were a little more than 5 thousand miles from the Earth's
surface."

"Five thousand miles already!" cried Ardan, "why we have only just
started!"

"Let us see about that," quietly observed the Captain, looking at his
chronometer, and calculating with his pencil. "It is now 10 minutes past
eleven; we have therefore been 23 minutes on the road. Supposing our
initial velocity of 10,000 yards or nearly seven miles a second, to have
been kept up, we should by this time be about 9,000 miles from the
Earth; but by allowing for friction and gravity, we can hardly be more
than 5,500 miles. Yes, friend Barbican, Petit does not seem to be very
wrong in his calculations."

But Barbican hardly heard the observation. He had not yet answered the
puzzling question that had already presented itself to them for
solution; and until he had done so he could not attend to anything else.

"That's all very well and good, Captain," he replied in an absorbed
manner, "but we have not yet been able to account for a very strange
phenomenon. Why didn't we hear the report?"

No one replying, the conversation came to a stand-still, and Barbican,
still absorbed in his reflections, began clearing the second light of
its external shutter. In a few minutes the plate dropped, and the Moon
beams, flowing in, filled the interior of the Projectile with her
brilliant light. The Captain immediately put out the gas, from motives
of economy as well as because its glare somewhat interfered with the
observation of the interplanetary regions.

The Lunar disc struck the travellers as glittering with a splendor and
purity of light that they had never witnessed before. The beams, no
longer strained through the misty atmosphere of the Earth, streamed
copiously in through the glass and coated the interior walls of the
Projectile with a brilliant silvery plating. The intense blackness of
the sky enhanced the dazzling radiance of the Moon. Even the stars
blazed with a new and unequalled splendor, and, in the absence of a
refracting atmosphere, they flamed as bright in the close proximity of
the Moon as in any other part of the sky.

You can easily conceive the interest with which these bold travellers
gazed on the Starry Queen, the final object of their daring journey. She
was now insensibly approaching the zenith, the mathematical point which
she was to reach four days later. They presented their telescopes, but
her mountains, plains, craters and general characteristics hardly came
out a particle more sharply than if they had been viewed from the Earth.
Still, her light, unobstructed by air or vapor, shimmered with a lustre
actually transplendent. Her disc shone like a mirror of polished
platins. The travellers remained for some time absorbed in the silent
contemplation of the glorious scene.

"How they're gazing at her this very moment from Stony Hill!" said the
Captain at last to break the silence.

"By Jove!" cried Ardan; "It's true! Captain you're right. We were near
forgetting our dear old Mother, the Earth. What ungrateful children! Let
me feast my eyes once more on the blessed old creature!"

Barbican, to satisfy his companion's desire, immediately commenced to
clear away the disc which covered the floor of the Projectile and
prevented them from getting at the lower light. This disc, though it had
been dashed to the bottom of the Projectile with great violence, was
still as strong as ever, and, being made in compartments fastened by
screws, to dismount it was no easy matter. Barbican, however, with the
help of the others, soon had it all taken apart, and put away the pieces
carefully, to serve again in case of need. A round hole about a foot and
a half in diameter appeared, bored through the floor of the Projectile.
It was closed by a circular pane of plate-glass, which was about six
inches thick, fastened by a ring of copper. Below, on the outside, the
glass was protected by an aluminium plate, kept in its place by strong
bolts and nuts. The latter being unscrewed, the bolts slipped out by
their own weight, the shutter fell, and a new communication was
established between the interior and the exterior.

Ardan knelt down, applied his eye to the light, and tried to look out.
At first everything was quite dark and gloomy.

"I see no Earth!" he exclaimed at last.

"Don't you see a fine ribbon of light?" asked Barbican, "right beneath
us? A thin, pale, silvery crescent?"

"Of course I do. Can that be the Earth?"

"_Terra Mater_ herself, friend Ardan. That fine fillet of light, now
hardly visible on her eastern border, will disappear altogether as soon
as the Moon is full. Then, lying as she will be between the Sun and the
Moon, her illuminated face will be turned away from us altogether, and
for several days she will be involved in impenetrable darkness."

"And that's the Earth!" repeated Ardan, hardly able to believe his eyes,
as he continued to gaze on the slight thread of silvery white light,
somewhat resembling the appearance of the "Young May Moon" a few hours
after sunset.

Barbican's explanation was quite correct. The Earth, in reference to the
Moon or the Projectile, was in her last phase, or octant as it is
called, and showed a sharp-horned, attenuated, but brilliant crescent
strongly relieved by the black background of the sky. Its light,
rendered a little bluish by the density of the atmospheric envelopes,
was not quite as brilliant as the Moon's. But the Earth's crescent,
compared to the Lunar, was of dimensions much greater, being fully 4
times larger. You would have called it a vast, beautiful, but very thin
bow extending over the sky. A few points, brighter than the rest,
particularly in its concave part, revealed the presence of lofty
mountains, probably the Himalayahs. But they disappeared every now and
then under thick vapory spots, which are never seen on the Lunar disc.
They were the thin concentric cloud rings that surround the terrestrial
sphere.

However, the travellers' eyes were soon able to trace the rest of the
Earth's surface not only with facility, but even to follow its outline
with absolute delight. This was in consequence of two different
phenomena, one of which they could easily account for; but the other
they could not explain without Barbican's assistance. No wonder. Never
before had mortal eye beheld such a sight. Let us take each in its turn.

We all know that the ashy light by means of which we perceive what is
called the _Old Moon in the Young Moon's arms_ is due to the
Earth-shine, or the reflection of the solar rays from the Earth to the
Moon. By a phenomenon exactly identical, the travellers could now see
that portion of the Earth's surface which was unillumined by the Sun;
only, as, in consequence of the different areas of the respective
surfaces, the _Earthlight_ is thirteen times more intense than the
_Moonlight_, the dark portion of the Earth's disc appeared considerably
more adumbrated than the _Old Moon_.

But the other phenomenon had burst on them so suddenly that they
uttered a cry loud enough to wake up Barbican from his problem. They had
discovered a true starry ring! Around the Earth's outline, a ring, of
internally well defined thickness, but somewhat hazy on the outside,
could easily be traced by its surpassing brilliancy. Neither the
_Pleiades_, the _Northern Crown_, the _Magellanic Clouds_ nor the great
nebulas of _Orion_, or of _Argo_, no sparkling cluster, no corona, no
group of glittering star-dust that the travellers had ever gazed at,
presented such attractions as the diamond ring they now saw encompassing
the Earth, just as the brass meridian encompasses a terrestrial globe.
The resplendency of its light enchanted them, its pure softness
delighted them, its perfect regularity astonished them. What was it?
they asked Barbican. In a few words he explained it. The beautiful
luminous ring was simply an optical illusion, produced by the refraction
of the terrestrial atmosphere. All the stars in the neighborhood of the
Earth, and many actually behind it, had their rays refracted, diffused,
radiated, and finally converged to a focus by the atmosphere, as if by a
double convex lens of gigantic power.

Whilst the travellers were profoundly absorbed in the contemplation of
this wondrous sight, a sparkling shower of shooting stars suddenly
flashed over the Earth's dark surface, making it for a moment as bright
as the external ring. Hundreds of bolides, catching fire from contact
with the atmosphere, streaked the darkness with their luminous trails,
overspreading it occasionally with sheets of electric flame. The Earth
was just then in her perihelion, and we all know that the months of
November and December are so highly favorable to the appearance of these
meteoric showers that at the famous display of November, 1866,
astronomers counted as many as 8,000 between midnight and four o'clock.

Barbican explained the whole matter in a few words. The Earth, when
nearest to the sun, occasionally plunges into a group of countless
meteors travelling like comets, in eccentric orbits around the grand
centre of our solar system. The atmosphere strikes the rapidly moving
bodies with such violence as to set them on fire and render them visible
to us in beautiful star showers. But to this simple explanation of the
famous November meteors Ardan would not listen. He preferred believing
that Mother Earth, feeling that her three daring children were still
looking at her, though five thousand miles away, shot off her best
rocket-signals to show that she still thought of them and would never
let them out of her watchful eye.

For hours they continued to gaze with indescribable interest on the
faintly luminous mass so easily distinguishable among the other heavenly
bodies. Jupiter blazed on their right, Mars flashed his ruddy light on
their left, Saturn with his rings looked like a round white spot on a
black wall; even Venus they could see almost directly under them, easily
recognizing her by her soft, sweetly scintillant light. But no planet or
constellation possessed any attraction for the travellers, as long as
their eyes could trace that shadowy, crescent-edged, diamond-girdled,
meteor-furrowed spheroid, the theatre of their existence, the home of so
many undying desires, the mysterious cradle of their race!

Meantime the Projectile cleaved its way upwards, rapidly, unswervingly,
though with a gradually retarding velocity. As the Earth sensibly grew
darker, and the travellers' eyes grew dimmer, an irresistible somnolency
slowly stole over their weary frames. The extraordinary excitement they
had gone through during the last four or five hours, was naturally
followed by a profound reaction.

"Captain, you're nodding," said Ardan at last, after a longer silence
than usual; "the fact is, Barbican is the only wake man of the party,
because he is puzzling over his problem. _Dum vivimus vivamus_! As we
are asleep let us be asleep!"

So saying he threw himself on the mattress, and his companions
immediately followed the example.

They had been lying hardly a quarter of an hour, when Barbican started
up with a cry so loud and sudden as instantly to awaken his companions.

The bright moonlight showed them the President sitting up in his bed,
his eye blazing, his arms waving, as he shouted in a tone reminding them
of the day they had found him in St. Helena wood.

"_Eureka!_ I've got it! I know it!"

"What have you got?" cried Ardan, bouncing up and seizing him by the
right hand.

"What do you know?" cried the Captain, stretching over and seizing him
by the left.

"The reason why we did not hear the report!"

"Well, why did not we hear it!" asked both rapidly in the same breath.

"Because we were shot up 30 times faster than sound can travel!"




CHAPTER III.

THEY MAKE THEMSELVES AT HOME AND FEEL QUITE COMFORTABLE.


This curious explanation given, and its soundness immediately
recognized, the three friends were soon fast wrapped in the arms of
Morpheus. Where in fact could they have found a spot more favorable for
undisturbed repose? On land, where the dwellings, whether in populous
city or lonely country, continually experience every shock that thrills
the Earth's crust? At sea, where between waves or winds or paddles or
screws or machinery, everything is tremor, quiver or jar? In the air,
where the balloon is incessantly twirling, oscillating, on account of
the ever varying strata of different densities, and even occasionally
threatening to spill you out? The Projectile alone, floating grandly
through the absolute void, in the midst of the profoundest silence,
could offer to its inmates the possibility of enjoying slumber the most
complete, repose the most profound.

There is no telling how long our three daring travellers would have
continued to enjoy their sleep, if it had not been suddenly terminated
by an unexpected noise about seven o'clock in the morning of December
2nd, eight hours after their departure.

This noise was most decidedly of barking.

"The dogs! It's the dogs!" cried Ardan, springing up at a bound.

"They must be hungry!" observed the Captain.

"We have forgotten the poor creatures!" cried Barbican.

"Where can they have gone to?" asked Ardan, looking for them in all
directions.

At last they found one of them hiding under the sofa. Thunderstruck and
perfectly bewildered by the terrible shock, the poor animal had kept
close in its hiding place, never daring to utter a sound, until at last
the pangs of hunger had proved too strong even for its fright.

They readily recognized the amiable Diana, but they could not allure the
shivering, whining animal from her retreat without a good deal of
coaxing. Ardan talked to her in his most honeyed and seductive accents,
while trying to pull her out by the neck.

"Come out to your friends, charming Diana," he went on, "come out, my
beauty, destined for a lofty niche in the temple of canine glory! Come
out, worthy scion of a race deemed worthy by the Egyptians to be a
companion of the great god, Anubis, by the Christians, to be a friend of
the good Saint Roch! Come out and partake of a glory before which the
stars of Montargis and of St. Bernard shall henceforward pale their
ineffectual fire! Come out, my lady, and let me think o'er the countless
multiplication of thy species, so that, while sailing through the
interplanetary spaces, we may indulge in endless flights of fancy on
the number and variety of thy descendants who will ere long render the
Selenitic atmosphere vocal with canine ululation!"

[Illustration: MORE HUNGRY THAN EITHER.]

Diana, whether flattered or not, allowed herself to be dragged out,
still uttering short, plaintive whines. A hasty examination satisfying
her friends that she was more frightened than hurt and more hungry than
either, they continued their search for her companion.

"Satellite! Satellite! Step this way, sir!" cried Ardan. But no
Satellite appeared and, what was worse, not the slightest sound indicated
his presence. At last he was discovered on a ledge in the upper portion
of the Projectile, whither he had been shot by the terrible concussion.
Less fortunate than his female companion, the poor fellow had received a
frightful shock and his life was evidently in great danger.

"The acclimatization project looks shaky!" cried Ardan, handing the
animal very carefully and tenderly to the others. Poor Satellite's head
had been crushed against the roof, but, though recovery seemed hopeless,
they laid the body on a soft cushion, and soon had the satisfaction of
hearing it give vent to a slight sigh.

"Good!" said Ardan, "while there's life there's hope. You must not die
yet, old boy. We shall nurse you. We know our duty and shall not shirk
the responsibility. I should rather lose the right arm off my body than
be the cause of your death, poor Satellite! Try a little water?"

The suffering creature swallowed the cool draught with evident avidity,
then sunk into a deep slumber.

The friends, sitting around and having nothing more to do, looked out of
the window and began once more to watch the Earth and the Moon with
great attention. The glittering crescent of the Earth was evidently
narrower than it had been the preceding evening, but its volume was
still enormous when compared to the Lunar crescent, which was now
rapidly assuming the proportions of a perfect circle.

"By Jove," suddenly exclaimed Ardan, "why didn't we start at the moment
of Full Earth?--that is when our globe and the Sun were in opposition?"

"Why _should_ we!" growled M'Nicholl.

"Because in that case we should be now looking at the great continents
and the great seas in a new light--the former glittering under the solar
rays, the latter darker and somewhat shaded, as we see them on certain
maps. How I should like to get a glimpse at those poles of the Earth, on
which the eye of man has never yet lighted!"

"True," replied Barbican, "but if the Earth had been Full, the Moon
would have been New, that is to say, invisible to us on account of solar
irradiation. Of the two it is much preferable to be able to keep the
point of arrival in view rather than the point of departure."

"You're right, Barbican," observed the Captain; "besides, once we're in
the Moon, the long Lunar night will give us plenty of time to gaze our
full at yonder great celestial body, our former home, and still
swarming with our fellow beings."

"Our fellow beings no longer, dear boy!" cried Ardan. "We inhabit a new
world peopled by ourselves alone, the Projectile! Ardan is Barbican's
fellow being, and Barbican M'Nicholl's. Beyond us, outside us, humanity
ends, and we are now the only inhabitants of this microcosm, and so we
shall continue till the moment when we become Selenites pure and
simple."

"Which shall be in about eighty-eight hours from now," replied the
Captain.

"Which is as much as to say--?" asked Ardan.

"That it is half past eight," replied M'Nicholl.

"My regular hour for breakfast," exclaimed Ardan, "and I don't see the
shadow of a reason for changing it now."

The proposition was most acceptable, especially to the Captain, who
frequently boasted that, whether on land or water, on mountain summits
or in the depths of mines, he had never missed a meal in all his life.
In escaping from the Earth, our travellers felt that they had by no
means escaped from the laws of humanity, and their stomachs now called
on them lustily to fill the aching void. Ardan, as a Frenchman, claimed
the post of chief cook, an important office, but his companions yielded
it with alacrity. The gas furnished the requisite heat, and the
provision chest supplied the materials for their first repast. They
commenced with three plates of excellent soup, extracted from _Liebig's_
precious tablets, prepared from the best beef that ever roamed over the
Pampas.

To this succeeded several tenderloin beefsteaks, which, though reduced
to a small bulk by the hydraulic engines of the _American Dessicating
Company_, were pronounced to be fully as tender, juicy and savory as if
they had just left the gridiron of a London Club House. Ardan even swore
that they were "bleeding," and the others were too busy to contradict
him.

Preserved vegetables of various kinds, "fresher than nature," according
to Ardan, gave an agreeable variety to the entertainment, and these were
followed by several cups of magnificent tea, unanimously allowed to be
the best they had ever tasted. It was an odoriferous young hyson
gathered that very year, and presented to the Emperor of Russia by the
famous rebel chief Yakub Kushbegi, and of which Alexander had expressed
himself as very happy in being able to send a few boxes to his friend,
the distinguished President of the Baltimore Gun Club. To crown the
meal, Ardan unearthed an exquisite bottle of _Chambertin_, and, in
glasses sparkling with the richest juice of the _Cote d'or,_ the
travellers drank to the speedy union of the Earth and her satellite.

And, as if his work among the generous vineyards of Burgundy had not
been enough to show his interest in the matter, even the Sun wished to
join the party. Precisely at this moment, the Projectile beginning to
leave the conical shadow cast by the Earth, the rays of the glorious
King of Day struck its lower surface, not obliquely, but
perpendicularly, on account of the slight obliquity of the Moon's orbit
with that of the Earth.

[Illustration: TO THE UNION OF THE EARTH AND HER SATELLITE.]

"The Sun," cried Ardan.

"Of course," said Barbican, looking at his watch, "he's exactly up to
time."

"How is it that we see him only through the bottom light of our
Projectile?" asked Ardan.

"A moment's reflection must tell you," replied Barbican, "that when we
started last night, the Sun was almost directly below us; therefore, as
we continue to move in a straight line, he must still be in our rear."

"That's clear enough," said the Captain, "but another consideration, I'm
free to say, rather perplexes me. Since our Earth lies between us and
the Sun, why don't we see the sunlight forming a great ring around the
globe, in other words, instead of the full Sun that we plainly see there
below, why do we not witness an annular eclipse?"

"Your cool, clear head has not yet quite recovered from the shock, my
dear Captain;" replied Barbican, with a smile. "For two reasons we can't
see the ring eclipse: on account of the angle the Moon's orbit makes
with the Earth, the three bodies are not at present in a direct line;
we, therefore, see the Sun a little to the west of the earth; secondly,
even if they were exactly in a straight line, we should still be far
from the point whence an annular eclipse would be visible."

"That's true," said Ardan; "the cone of the Earth's shadow must extend
far beyond the Moon."

"Nearly four times as far," said Barbican; "still, as the Moon's orbit
and the Earth's do not lie in exactly the same plane, a Lunar eclipse
can occur only when the nodes coincide with the period of the Full Moon,
which is generally twice, never more than three times in a year. If we
had started about four days before the occurrence of a Lunar eclipse, we
should travel all the time in the dark. This would have been obnoxious
for many reasons."

"One, for instance?"

"An evident one is that, though at the present moment we are moving
through a vacuum, our Projectile, steeped in the solar rays, revels in
their light and heat. Hence great saving in gas, an important point in
our household economy."

In effect, the solar rays, tempered by no genial medium like our
atmosphere, soon began to glare and glow with such intensity, that the
Projectile under their influence, felt like suddenly passing from winter
to summer. Between the Moon overhead and the Sun beneath it was actually
inundated with fiery rays.

"One feels good here," cried the Captain, rubbing his hands.

"A little too good," cried Ardan. "It's already like a hot-house. With a
little garden clay, I could raise you a splendid crop of peas in
twenty-four hours. I hope in heaven the walls of our Projectile won't
melt like wax!"

"Don't be alarmed, dear friend," observed Barbican, quietly. "The
Projectile has seen the worst as far as heat is concerned; when tearing
through the atmosphere, she endured a temperature with which what she is
liable to at present stands no comparison. In fact, I should not be
astonished if, in the eyes of our friends at Stony Hill, it had
resembled for a moment or two a red-hot meteor."

"Poor Marston must have looked on us as roasted alive!" observed Ardan.

"What could have saved us I'm sure I can't tell," replied Barbican. "I
must acknowledge that against such a danger, I had made no provision
whatever."

"I knew all about it," said the Captain, "and on the strength of it, I
had laid my fifth wager."

"Probably," laughed Ardan, "there was not time enough to get grilled in:
I have heard of men who dipped their fingers into molten iron with
impunity."

Whilst Ardan and the Captain were arguing the point, Barbican began
busying himself in making everything as comfortable as if, instead of a
four days' journey, one of four years was contemplated. The reader, no
doubt, remembers that the floor of the Projectile contained about 50
square feet; that the chamber was nine feet high; that space was
economized as much as possible, nothing but the most absolute
necessities being admitted, of which each was kept strictly in its own
place; therefore, the travellers had room enough to move around in with
a certain liberty. The thick glass window in the floor was quite as
solid as any other part of it; but the Sun, streaming in from below,
lit up the Projectile strangely, producing some very singular and
startling effects of light appearing to come in by the wrong way.

The first thing now to be done was to see after the water cask and the
provision chest. They were not injured in the slightest respect, thanks
to the means taken to counteract the shock. The provisions were in good
condition, and abundant enough to supply the travellers for a whole
year--Barbican having taken care to be on the safe side, in case the
Projectile might land in a deserted region of the Moon. As for the water
and the other liquors, the travellers had enough only for two months.
Relying on the latest observations of astronomers, they had convinced
themselves that the Moon's atmosphere, being heavy, dense and thick in
the deep valleys, springs and streams of water could hardly fail to show
themselves there. During the journey, therefore, and for the first year
of their installation on the Lunar continent, the daring travellers
would be pretty safe from all danger of hunger or thirst.

The air supply proved also to be quite satisfactory. The _Reiset_ and
_Regnault_ apparatus for producing oxygen contained a supply of chlorate
of potash sufficient for two months. As the productive material had to
be maintained at a temperature of between 7 and 8 hundred degrees Fahr.,
a steady consumption of gas was required; but here too the supply far
exceeded the demand. The whole arrangement worked charmingly, requiring
only an odd glance now and then. The high temperature changing the
chlorate into a chloride, the oxygen was disengaged gradually but
abundantly, every eighteen pounds of chlorate of potash, furnishing the
seven pounds of oxygen necessary for the daily consumption of the
inmates of the Projectile.

Still--as the reader need hardly be reminded--it was not sufficient to
renew the exhausted oxygen; the complete purification of the air
required the absorption of the carbonic acid, exhaled from the lungs.
For nearly 12 hours the atmosphere had been gradually becoming more and
more charged with this deleterious gas, produced from the combustion of
the blood by the inspired oxygen. The Captain soon saw this, by noticing
with what difficulty Diana was panting. She even appeared to be
smothering, for the carbonic acid--as in the famous _Grotto del Cane_ on
the banks of Lake Agnano, near Naples--was collecting like water on the
floor of the Projectile, on account of its great specific gravity. It
already threatened the poor dog's life, though not yet endangering that
of her masters. The Captain, seeing this state of things, hastily laid
on the floor one or two cups containing caustic potash and water, and
stirred the mixture gently: this substance, having a powerful affinity
for carbonic acid, greedily absorbed it, and after a few moments the air
was completely purified.

The others had begun by this time to check off the state of the
instruments. The thermometer and the barometer were all right, except
one self-recorder of which the glass had got broken. An excellent
aneroid barometer, taken safe and sound out of its wadded box, was
carefully hung on a hook in the wall. It marked not only the pressure of
the air in the Projectile, but also the quantity of the watery vapor
that it contained. The needle, oscillating a little beyond thirty,
pointed pretty steadily at "_Fair_."

The mariner's compasses were also found to be quite free from injury. It
is, of course, hardly necessary to say that the needles pointed in no
particular direction, the magnetic pole of the Earth being unable at
such a distance to exercise any appreciable influence on them. But when
brought to the Moon, it was expected that these compasses, once more
subjected to the influence of the current, would attest certain
phenomena. In any case, it would be interesting to verify if the Earth
and her satellite were similarly affected by the magnetic forces.

A hypsometer, or instrument for ascertaining the heights of the Lunar
mountains by the barometric pressure under which water boils, a sextant
to measure the altitude of the Sun, a theodolite for taking horizontal
or vertical angles, telescopes, of indispensable necessity when the
travellers should approach the Moon,--all these instruments, carefully
examined, were found to be still in perfect working order,
notwithstanding the violence of the terrible shock at the start.

As to the picks, spades, and other tools that had been carefully
selected by the Captain; also the bags of various kinds of grain and
the bundles of various kinds of shrubs, which Ardan expected to
transplant to the Lunar plains--they were all still safe in their places
around the upper corners of the Projectile.

Some other articles were also up there which evidently possessed great
interest for the Frenchman. What they were nobody else seemed to know,
and he seemed to be in no hurry to tell. Every now and then, he would
climb up, by means of iron pins fixed in the wall, to inspect his
treasures; whatever they were, he arranged them and rearranged them with
evident pleasure, and as he rapidly passed a careful hand through
certain mysterious boxes, he joyfully sang in the falsest possible of
false voices the lively piece from _Nicolo_:

    _Le temps est beau, la route est belle,
    La promenade est un plaisir_.

    {The day is bright, our hearts are light.}
    {How sweet to rove through wood and dell.}

or the well known air in _Mignon_:

    _Legères hirondelles,
    Oiseaux bénis de Dieu,
    Ouvrez-ouvrez vos ailes,
    Envolez-vous! adieu!_

    {Farewell, happy Swallows, farewell!}
    {With summer for ever to dwell}
    {Ye leave our northern strand}
    {For the genial southern land}
    {Balmy with breezes bland.}
    {Return? Ah, who can tell?}
    {Farewell, happy Swallows, farewell!}

Barbican was much gratified to find that his rockets and other fireworks
had not received the least injury. He relied upon them for the
performance of a very important service as soon as the Projectile,
having passed the point of neutral attraction between the Earth and the
Moon, would begin to fall with accelerated velocity towards the Lunar
surface. This descent, though--thanks to the respective volumes of the
attracting bodies--six times less rapid than it would have been on the
surface of the Earth, would still be violent enough to dash the
Projectile into a thousand pieces. But Barbican confidently expected by
means of his powerful rockets to offer very considerable obstruction to
the violence of this fall, if not to counteract its terrible effects
altogether.

The inspection having thus given general satisfaction, the travellers
once more set themselves to watching external space through the lights
in the sides and the floor of the Projectile.

Everything still appeared to be in the same state as before. Nothing was
changed. The vast arch of the celestial dome glittered with stars, and
constellations blazed with a light clear and pure enough to throw an
astronomer into an ecstasy of admiration. Below them shone the Sun, like
the mouth of a white-hot furnace, his dazzling disc defined sharply on
the pitch-black back-ground of the sky. Above them the Moon, reflecting
back his rays from her glowing surface, appeared to stand motionless in
the midst of the starry host.

A little to the east of the Sun, they could see a pretty large dark
spot, like a hole in the sky, the broad silver fringe on one edge fading
off into a faint glimmering mist on the other--it was the Earth. Here
and there in all directions, nebulous masses gleamed like large flakes
of star dust, in which, from nadir to zenith, the eye could trace
without a break that vast ring of impalpable star powder, the famous
_Milky Way_, through the midst of which the beams of our glorious Sun
struggle with the dusky pallor of a star of only the fourth magnitude.

Our observers were never weary of gazing on this magnificent and novel
spectacle, of the grandeur of which, it is hardly necessary to say, no
description can give an adequate idea. What profound reflections it
suggested to their understandings! What vivid emotions it enkindled in
their imaginations! Barbican, desirous of commenting the story of the
journey while still influenced by these inspiring impressions, noted
carefully hour by hour every fact that signalized the beginning of his
enterprise. He wrote out his notes very carefully and systematically,
his round full hand, as business-like as ever, never betraying the
slightest emotion.

The Captain was quite as busy, but in a different way. Pulling out his
tablets, he reviewed his calculations regarding the motion of
projectiles, their velocities, ranges and paths, their retardations and
their accelerations, jotting down the figures with a rapidity wonderful
to behold. Ardan neither wrote nor calculated, but kept up an incessant
fire of small talk, now with Barbican, who hardly ever answered him,
now with M'Nicholl, who never heard him, occasionally with Diana, who
never understood him, but oftenest with himself, because, as he said, he
liked not only to talk to a sensible man but also to hear what a
sensible man had to say. He never stood still for a moment, but kept
"bobbing around" with the effervescent briskness of a bee, at one time
roosting at the top of the ladder, at another peering through the floor
light, now to the right, then to the left, always humming scraps from
the _Opera Bouffe_, but never changing the air. In the small space which
was then a whole world to the travellers, he represented to the life the
animation and loquacity of the French, and I need hardly say he played
his part to perfection.

The eventful day, or, to speak more correctly, the space of twelve hours
which with us forms a day, ended for our travellers with an abundant
supper, exquisitely cooked. It was highly enjoyed.

No incident had yet occurred of a nature calculated to shake their
confidence. Apprehending none therefore, full of hope rather and already
certain of success, they were soon lost in a peaceful slumber, whilst
the Projectile, moving rapidly, though with a velocity uniformly
retarding, still cleaved its way through the pathless regions of the
empyrean.




CHAPTER IV.

A CHAPTER FOR THE CORNELL GIRLS.


No incident worth recording occurred during the night, if night indeed
it could be called. In reality there was now no night or even day in the
Projectile, or rather, strictly speaking, it was always _night_ on the
upper end of the bullet, and always _day_ on the lower. Whenever,
therefore, the words _night_ and _day_ occur in our story, the reader
will readily understand them as referring to those spaces of time that
are so called in our Earthly almanacs, and were so measured by the
travellers' chronometers.

The repose of our friends must indeed have been undisturbed, if absolute
freedom from sound or jar of any kind could secure tranquillity. In
spite of its immense velocity, the Projectile still seemed to be
perfectly motionless. Not the slightest sign of movement could be
detected. Change of locality, though ever so rapid, can never reveal
itself to our senses when it takes place in a vacuum, or when the
enveloping atmosphere travels at the same rate as the moving body.
Though we are incessantly whirled around the Sun at the rate of about
seventy thousand miles an hour, which of us is conscious of the
slightest motion? In such a case, as far as sensation is concerned,
motion and repose are absolutely identical. Neither has any effect one
way or another on a material body. Is such a body in motion? It remains
in motion until some obstacle stops it. Is it at rest? It remains at
rest until some superior force compels it to change its position. This
indifference of bodies to motion or rest is what physicists call
_inertia_.

Barbican and his companions, therefore, shut up in the Projectile, could
readily imagine themselves to be completely motionless. Had they been
outside, the effect would have been precisely the same. No rush of air,
no jarring sensation would betray the slightest movement. But for the
sight of the Moon gradually growing larger above them, and of the Earth
gradually growing smaller beneath them, they could safely swear that
they were fast anchored in an ocean of deathlike immobility.

Towards the morning of next day (December 3), they were awakened by a
joyful, but quite unexpected sound.

"Cock-a-doodle! doo!" accompanied by a decided flapping of wings.

The Frenchman, on his feet in one instant and on the top of the ladder
in another, attempted to shut the lid of a half open box, speaking in an
angry but suppressed voice:

"Stop this hullabaloo, won't you? Do you want me to fail in my great
combination!"

"Hello?" cried Barbican and M'Nicholl, starting up and rubbing their
eyes.

"What noise was that?" asked Barbican.

"Seems to me I heard the crowing of a cock," observed the Captain.

"I never thought your ears could be so easily deceived, Captain," cried
Ardan, quickly, "Let us try it again," and, flapping his ribs with his
arms, he gave vent to a crow so loud and natural that the lustiest
chanticleer that ever saluted the orb of day might be proud of it.

The Captain roared right out, and even Barbican snickered, but as they
saw that their companion evidently wanted to conceal something, they
immediately assumed straight faces and pretended to think no more about
the matter.

"Barbican," said Ardan, coming down the ladder and evidently anxious to
change the conversation, "have you any idea of what I was thinking about
all night?"

"Not the slightest."

"I was thinking of the promptness of the reply you received last year
from the authorities of Cambridge University, when you asked them about
the feasibility of sending a bullet to the Moon. You know very well by
this time what a perfect ignoramus I am in Mathematics. I own I have
been often puzzled when thinking on what grounds they could form such a
positive opinion, in a case where I am certain that the calculation must
be an exceedingly delicate matter."

"The feasibility, you mean to say," replied Barbican, "not exactly of
sending a bullet to the Moon, but of sending it to the neutral point
between the Earth and the Moon, which lies at about nine-tenths of the
journey, where the two attractions counteract each other. Because that
point once passed, the Projectile would reach the Moon's surface by
virtue of its own weight."

"Well, reaching that neutral point be it;" replied Ardan, "but, once
more, I should like to know how they have been able to come at the
necessary initial velocity of 12,000 yards a second?"

"Nothing simpler," answered Barbican.

"Could you have done it yourself?" asked the Frenchman.

"Without the slightest difficulty. The Captain and myself could have
readily solved the problem, only the reply from the University saved us
the trouble."

"Well, Barbican, dear boy," observed Ardan, "all I've got to say is, you
might chop the head off my body, beginning with my feet, before you
could make me go through such a calculation."

"Simply because you don't understand Algebra," replied Barbican,
quietly.

"Oh! that's all very well!" cried Ardan, with an ironical smile. "You
great _x+y_ men think you settle everything by uttering the word
_Algebra_!"

"Ardan," asked Barbican, "do you think people could beat iron without a
hammer, or turn up furrows without a plough?"

"Hardly."

"Well, Algebra is an instrument or utensil just as much as a hammer or a
plough, and a very good instrument too if you know how to make use of
it."

"You're in earnest?"

"Quite so."

"And you can handle the instrument right before my eyes?"

"Certainly, if it interests you so much."

"You can show me how they got at the initial velocity of our
Projectile?"

"With the greatest pleasure. By taking into proper consideration all the
elements of the problem, viz.: (1) the distance between the centres of
the Earth and the Moon, (2) the Earth's radius, (3) its volume, and (4)
the Moon's volume, I can easily calculate what must be the initial
velocity, and that too by a very simple formula."

"Let us have the formula."

"In one moment; only I can't give you the curve really described by the
Projectile as it moves between the Earth and the Moon; this is to be
obtained by allowing for their combined movement around the Sun. I will
consider the Earth and the Sun to be motionless, that being sufficient
for our present purpose."

"Why so?"

"Because to give you that exact curve would be to solve a point in the
'Problem of the Three Bodies,' which Integral Calculus has not yet
reached."

"What!" cried Ardan, in a mocking tone, "is there really anything that
Mathematics can't do?"

"Yes," said Barbican, "there is still a great deal that Mathematics
can't even attempt."

"So far, so good;" resumed Ardan. "Now then what is this Integral
Calculus of yours?"

"It is a branch of Mathematics that has for its object the summation of
a certain infinite series of indefinitely small terms: but for the
solution of which, we must generally know the function of which a given
function is the differential coefficient. In other words," continued
Barbican, "in it we return from the differential coefficient, to the
function from which it was deduced."

"Clear as mud!" cried Ardan, with a hearty laugh.

"Now then, let me have a bit of paper and a pencil," added Barbican,
"and in half an hour you shall have your formula; meantime you can
easily find something interesting to do."

In a few seconds Barbican was profoundly absorbed in his problem, while
M'Nicholl was watching out of the window, and Ardan was busily employed
in preparing breakfast.

The morning meal was not quite ready, when Barbican, raising his head,
showed Ardan a page covered with algebraic signs at the end of which
stood the following formula:--

 1     2   2         r         m'    r       r
--- (v' - v ) = gr {--- - 1 + --- (----- - -----) }
 2                   x         m   d - x   d - r

"Which means?" asked Ardan.

"It means," said the Captain, now taking part in the discussion, "that
the half of _v_ prime squared minus _v_ squared equals _gr_ multiplied
by _r_ over _x_ minus one plus _m_ prime over _m_ multiplied by _r_ over
_d_ minus _x_ minus _r_ over _d_ minus _r_ ... that is--"

"That is," interrupted Ardan, in a roar of laughter, "_x_ stradlegs on
_y_, making for _z_ and jumping over _p_! Do _you_ mean to say you
understand the terrible jargon, Captain?"

"Nothing is clearer, Ardan."

"You too, Captain! Then of course I must give in gracefully, and declare
that the sun at noon-day is not more palpably evident than the sense of
Barbican's formula."

"You asked for Algebra, you know," observed Barbican.

"Rock crystal is nothing to it!"

"The fact is, Barbican," said the Captain, who had been looking over the
paper, "you have worked the thing out very well. You have the integral
equation of the living forces, and I have no doubt it will give us the
result sought for."

"Yes, but I should like to understand it, you know," cried Ardan: "I
would give ten years of the Captain's life to understand it!"

"Listen then," said Barbican. "Half of _v_ prime squared less _v_
squared, is the formula giving us the half variation of the living
force."

"Mac pretends he understands all that!"

"You need not be a _Solomon_ to do it," said the Captain. "All these
signs that you appear to consider so cabalistic form a language the
clearest, the shortest, and the most logical, for all those who can read
it."

"You pretend, Captain, that, by means of these hieroglyphics, far more
incomprehensible than the sacred Ibis of the Egyptians, you can
discover the velocity at which the Projectile should start?"

"Most undoubtedly," replied the Captain, "and, by the same formula I can
even tell you the rate of our velocity at any particular point of our
journey."

"You can?"

"I can."

"Then you're just as deep a one as our President."

"No, Ardan; not at all. The really difficult part of the question
Barbican has done. That is, to make out such an equation as takes into
account all the conditions of the problem. After that, it's a simple
affair of Arithmetic, requiring only a knowledge of the four rules to
work it out."

"Very simple," observed Ardan, who always got muddled at any kind of a
difficult sum in addition.

"Captain," said Barbican, "_you_ could have found the formulas too, if
you tried."

"I don't know about that," was the Captain's reply, "but I do know that
this formula is wonderfully come at."

"Now, Ardan, listen a moment," said Barbican, "and you will see what
sense there is in all these letters."

"I listen," sighed Ardan with the resignation of a martyr.

"_d_ is the distance from the centre of the Earth to the centre of the
Moon, for it is from the centres that we must calculate the
attractions."

"That I comprehend."

"_r_ is the radius of the Earth."

"That I comprehend."

"_m_ is the mass or volume of the Earth; _m_ prime that of the Moon. We
must take the mass of the two attracting bodies into consideration,
since attraction is in direct proportion to their masses."

"That I comprehend."

"_g_ is the gravity or the velocity acquired at the end of a second by a
body falling towards the centre of the Earth. Clear?"

"That I comprehend."

"Now I represent by _x_ the varying distance that separates the
Projectile from the centre of the Earth, and by _v_ prime its velocity
at that distance."

"That I comprehend."

"Finally, _v_ is its velocity when quitting our atmosphere."

"Yes," chimed in the Captain, "it is for this point, you see, that the
velocity had to be calculated, because we know already that the initial
velocity is exactly the three halves of the velocity when the Projectile
quits the atmosphere."

"That I don't comprehend," cried the Frenchman, energetically.

"It's simple enough, however," said Barbican.

"Not so simple as a simpleton," replied the Frenchman.

"The Captain merely means," said Barbican, "that at the instant the
Projectile quitted the terrestrial atmosphere it had already lost a
third of its initial velocity."

"So much as a third?"

"Yes, by friction against the atmospheric layers: the quicker its
motion, the greater resistance it encountered."

"That of course I admit, but your _v_ squared and your _v_ prime squared
rattle in my head like nails in a box!"

"The usual effect of Algebra on one who is a stranger to it; to finish
you, our next step is to express numerically the value of these several
symbols. Now some of them are already known, and some are to be
calculated."

"Hand the latter over to me," said the Captain.

"First," continued Barbican: "_r_, the Earth's radius is, in the
latitude of Florida, about 3,921 miles. _d_, the distance from the
centre of the Earth to the centre of the Moon is 56 terrestrial radii,
which the Captain calculates to be...?"

"To be," cried M'Nicholl working rapidly with his pencil, "219,572
miles, the moment the Moon is in her _perigee_, or nearest point to the
Earth."

"Very well," continued Barbican. "Now _m_ prime over _m_, that is the
ratio of the Moon's mass to that of the Earth is about the 1/81. _g_
gravity being at Florida about 32-1/4 feet, of course _g_ x _r_ must
be--how much, Captain?"

"38,465 miles," replied M'Nicholl.

"Now then?" asked Ardan.

[Illustration: MY HEAD IS SPLITTING WITH IT.]

"Now then," replied Barbican, "the expression having numerical values, I
am trying to find _v_, that is to say, the initial velocity which the
Projectile must possess in order to reach the point where the two
attractions neutralize each other. Here the velocity being null, _v_
prime becomes zero, and _x_ the required distance of this neutral point
must be represented by the nine-tenths of _d_, the distance between the
two centres."

"I have a vague kind of idea that it must be so," said Ardan.

"I shall, therefore, have the following result;" continued Barbican,
figuring up; "_x_ being nine-tenths of _d_, and _v_ prime being zero, my
formula becomes:--

 2            10 r     1    10 r     r
v  = gr {1 - ----- - ---- (----- - -----) }
               d      81     d     d - r   "

The Captain read it off rapidly.

"Right! that's correct!" he cried.

"You think so?" asked Barbican.

"As true as Euclid!" exclaimed M'Nicholl.

"Wonderful fellows," murmured the Frenchman, smiling with admiration.

"You understand now, Ardan, don't you?" asked Barbican.

"Don't I though?" exclaimed Ardan, "why my head is splitting with it!"

"Therefore," continued Barbican,

" 2             10 r     1    10 r     r
2v  = 2gr {1 - ----- - ---- (----- - -----) }
                 d      81     d     d - r   "

"And now," exclaimed M'Nicholl, sharpening his pencil; "in order to
obtain the velocity of the Projectile when leaving the atmosphere, we
have only to make a slight calculation."

The Captain, who before clerking on a Mississippi steamboat had been
professor of Mathematics in an Indiana university, felt quite at home at
the work. He rained figures from his pencil with a velocity that would
have made Marston stare. Page after page was filled with his
multiplications and divisions, while Barbican looked quietly on, and
Ardan impatiently stroked his head and ears to keep down a rising
head-ache.

"Well?" at last asked Barbican, seeing the Captain stop and throw a
somewhat hasty glance over his work.

"Well," answered M'Nicholl slowly but confidently, "the calculation is
made, I think correctly; and _v_, that is, the velocity of the
Projectile when quitting the atmosphere, sufficient to carry it to the
neutral point, should be at least ..."

"How much?" asked Barbican, eagerly.

"Should be at least 11,972 yards the first second."

"What!" cried Barbican, jumping off his seat. "How much did you say?"

"11,972 yards the first second it quits the atmosphere."

"Oh, malediction!" cried Barbican, with a gesture of terrible despair.

"What's the matter?" asked Ardan, very much surprised.

"Enough is the matter!" answered Barbican excitedly. "This velocity
having been diminished by a third, our initial velocity should have been
at least ..."

"17,958 yards the first second!" cried M'Nicholl, rapidly flourishing
his pencil.

"But the Cambridge Observatory having declared that 12,000 yards the
first second were sufficient, our Projectile started with no greater
velocity!"

"Well?" asked M'Nicholl.

"Well, such a velocity will never do!"

"How??" }
"How!!" } cried the Captain and Ardan in one voice.

"We can never reach the neutral point!"

"Thunder and lightning"

"Fire and Fury!"

"We can't get even halfway!"

"Heaven and Earth!"

"_Mille noms d'un boulet!_" cried Ardan, wildly gesticulating.

"And we shall fall back to the Earth!"

"Oh!"

"Ah!"

They could say no more. This fearful revelation took them like a stroke
of apoplexy.




CHAPTER V.

THE COLDS OF SPACE.


How could they imagine that the Observatory men had committed such a
blunder? Barbican would not believe it possible. He made the Captain go
over his calculation again and again; but no flaw was to be found in it.
He himself carefully examined it, figure after figure, but he could find
nothing wrong. They both took up the formula and subjected it to the
strongest tests; but it was invulnerable. There was no denying the fact.
The Cambridge professors had undoubtedly blundered in saying that an
initial velocity of 12,000 yards a second would be enough to carry them
to the neutral point. A velocity of nearly 18,000 yards would be the
very lowest required for such a purpose. They had simply forgotten to
allow a third for friction.

The three friends kept profound silence for some time. Breakfast now was
the last thing thought of. Barbican, with teeth grating, fingers
clutching, and eye-brows closely contracting, gazed grimly through the
window. The Captain, as a last resource, once more examined his
calculations, earnestly hoping to find a figure wrong. Ardan could
neither sit, stand nor lie still for a second, though he tried all
three. His silence, of course, did not last long.

"Ha! ha! ha!" he laughed bitterly. "Precious scientific men! Villainous
old hombogues! The whole set not worth a straw! I hope to gracious,
since we must fall, that we shall drop down plumb on Cambridge
Observatory, and not leave a single one of the miserable old women,
called professors, alive in the premises!"

A certain expression in Ardan's angry exclamation had struck the Captain
like a shot, and set his temples throbbing violently.

"_Must_ fall!" he exclaimed, starting up suddenly. "Let us see about
that! It is now seven o'clock in the morning. We must have, therefore,
been at least thirty-two hours on the road, and more than half of our
passage is already made. If we are going to fall at all, we must be
falling now! I'm certain we're not, but, Barbican, you have to find it
out!"

Barbican caught the idea like lightning, and, seizing a compass, he
began through the floor window to measure the visual angle of the
distant Earth. The apparent immobility of the Projectile allowed him to
do this with great exactness. Then laying aside the instrument, and
wiping off the thick drops of sweat that bedewed his forehead, he began
jotting down some figures on a piece of paper. The Captain looked on
with keen interest; he knew very well that Barbican was calculating
their distance from the Earth by the apparent measure of the terrestrial
diameter, and he eyed him anxiously.

Pretty soon his friends saw a color stealing into Barbican's pale face,
and a triumphant light glittering in his eye.

"No, my brave boys!" he exclaimed at last throwing down his pencil,
"we're not falling! Far from it, we are at present more than 150
thousand miles from the Earth!"

"Hurrah!" }
"Bravo!"  } cried M'Nicholl and Ardan, in a breath.

"We have passed the point where we should have stopped if we had had no
more initial velocity than the Cambridge men allowed us!"

"Hurrah! hurrah!"

"Bravo, Bravissimo!"

"And we're still going up!"

"Glory, glory, hallelujah!" sang M'Nicholl, in the highest excitement.

"_Vive ce cher Barbican!_" cried Ardan, bursting into French as usual
whenever his feelings had the better of him.

"Of course we're marching on!" continued M'Nicholl, "and I know the
reason why, too. Those 400,000 pounds of gun-cotton gave us greater
initial velocity than we had expected!"

"You're right, Captain!" added Barbican; "besides, you must not forget
that, by getting rid of the water, the Projectile was relieved of
considerable weight!"

"Correct again!" cried the Captain. "I had not thought of that!"

"Therefore, my brave boys," continued Barbican, with some excitement;
"away with melancholy! We're all right!"

"Yes; everything is lovely and the goose hangs high!" cried the Captain,
who on grand occasions was not above a little slang.

"Talking of goose reminds me of breakfast," cried Ardan; "I assure you,
my fright has not taken away my appetite!"

"Yes," continued Barbican. "Captain, you're quite right. Our initial
velocity very fortunately was much greater than what our Cambridge
friends had calculated for us!"

"Hang our Cambridge friends and their calculations!" cried Ardan, with
some asperity; "as usual with your scientific men they've more brass
than brains! If we're not now bed-fellows with the oysters in the Gulf
of Mexico, no thanks to our kind Cambridge friends. But talking of
oysters, let me remind you again that breakfast is ready."

The meal was a most joyous one. They ate much, they talked more, but
they laughed most. The little incident of Algebra had certainly very
much enlivened the situation.

"Now, my boys," Ardan went on, "all things thus turning out quite
comfortable, I would just ask you why we should not succeed? We are
fairly started. No breakers ahead that I can see. No rock on our road.
It is freer than the ships on the raging ocean, aye, freer than the
balloons in the blustering air. But the ship arrives at her destination;
the balloon, borne on the wings of the wind, rises to as high an
altitude as can be endured; why then should not our Projectile reach the
Moon?"

"It _will_ reach the Moon!" nodded Barbican.

"We shall reach the Moon or know for what!" cried M'Nicholl,
enthusiastically.

"The great American nation must not be disappointed!" continued Ardan.
"They are the only people on Earth capable of originating such an
enterprise! They are the only people capable of producing a Barbican!"

"Hurrah!" cried M'Nicholl.

"That point settled," continued the Frenchman, "another question comes
up to which I have not yet called your attention. When we get to the
Moon, what shall we do there? How are we going to amuse ourselves? I'm
afraid our life there will be awfully slow!"

His companions emphatically disclaimed the possibility of such a thing.

"You may deny it, but I know better, and knowing better, I have laid in
my stores accordingly. You have but to choose. I possess a varied
assortment. Chess, draughts, cards, dominoes--everything in fact, but a
billiard table?"

"What!" exclaimed Barbican; "cumbered yourself with such gimcracks?"

"Such gimcracks are not only good to amuse ourselves with, but are
eminently calculated also to win us the friendship of the Selenites."

"Friend Michael," said Barbican, "if the Moon is inhabited at all, her
inhabitants must have appeared several thousand years before the advent
of Man on our Earth, for there seems to be very little doubt that Luna
is considerably older than Terra in her present state. Therefore,
Selenites, if their brain is organized like our own, must have by this
time invented all that we are possessed of, and even much which we are
still to invent in the course of ages. The probability is that, instead
of their learning from us, we shall have much to learn from them."

"What!" asked Ardan, "you think they have artists like Phidias, Michael
Angelo and Raphael?"

"Certainly."

"And poets like Homer, Virgil, Dante, Shakspeare, Göthe and Hugo?"

"Not a doubt of it."

"And philosophers like Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Bacon, Kant?"

"Why not?"

"And scientists like Euclid, Archimedes, Copernicus, Newton, Pascal?"

"I should think so."

"And famous actors, and singers, and composers, and--and photographers?"

"I could almost swear to it."

"Then, dear boy, since they have gone ahead as far as we and even
farther, why have not those great Selenites tried to start a
communication with the Earth? Why have they not fired a projectile from
the regions lunar to the regions terrestrial?"

"Who says they have not done so?" asked Barbican, coolly.

"Attempting such a communication," observed the Captain, "would
certainly be much easier for them than for us, principally for two
reasons. First, attraction on the Moon's surface being six times less
than on the Earth's, a projectile could be sent off more rapidly;
second, because, as this projectile need be sent only 24 instead of 240
thousand miles, they could do it with a quantity of powder ten times
less than what we should require for the same purpose."

"Then I ask again," said the Frenchman; "why haven't they made such an
attempt?"

"And I reply again," answered Barbican. "How do you know that they have
not made such an attempt?"

"Made it? When?"

"Thousands of years ago, before the invention of writing, before even
the appearance of Man on the Earth."

"But the bullet?" asked Ardan, triumphantly; "Where's the bullet?
Produce the bullet!"

"Friend Michael," answered Barbican, with a quiet smile, "you appear to
forget that the 5/6 of the surface of our Earth is water. 5 to 1,
therefore, that the bullet is more likely to be lying this moment at the
bottom of the Atlantic or the Pacific than anywhere else on the surface
of our globe. Besides, it may have sunk into some weak point of the
surface, at the early epoch when the crust of the Earth had not acquired
sufficient solidity."

"Captain," said Ardan, turning with a smile to M'Nicholl; "no use in
trying to catch Barby; slippery as an eel, he has an answer for
everything. Still I have a theory on the subject myself, which I think
it no harm to ventilate. It is this: The Selenites have never sent us
any projectile at all, simply because they had no gunpowder: being older
and wiser than we, they were never such fools as to invent any.--But,
what's that? Diana howling for her breakfast! Good! Like genuine
scientific men, while squabbling over nonsense, we let the poor animals
die of hunger. Excuse us, Diana; it is not the first time the little
suffer from the senseless disputes of the great."

So saying he laid before the animal a very toothsome pie, and
contemplated with evident pleasure her very successful efforts towards
its hasty and complete disappearance.

"Looking at Diana," he went on, "makes me almost wish we had made a
Noah's Ark of our Projectile by introducing into it a pair of all the
domestic animals!"

"Not room enough," observed Barbican.

"No doubt," remarked the Captain, "the ox, the cow, the horse, the goat,
all the ruminating animals would be very useful in the Lunar continent.
But we couldn't turn our Projectile into a stable, you know."

"Still, we might have made room for a pair of poor little donkeys!"
observed Ardan; "how I love the poor beasts. Fellow feeling, you will
say. No doubt, but there really is no animal I pity more. They are the
most ill-treated brutes in all creation. They are not only banged during
life; they are banged worse after death!"

"Hey! How do you make that out?" asked his companions, surprised.

"Because we make their skins into drum heads!" replied Ardan, with an
air, as if answering a conundrum.

Barbican and M'Nicholl could hardly help laughing at the absurd reply of
their lively companion, but their hilarity was soon stopped by the
expression his face assumed as he bent over Satellite's body, where it
lay stretched on the sofa.

"What's the matter now?" asked Barbican.

"Satellite's attack is over," replied Ardan.

"Good!" said M'Nicholl, misunderstanding him.

"Yes, I suppose it is good for the poor fellow," observed Ardan, in
melancholy accents. "Life with one's skull broken is hardly an enviable
possession. Our grand acclimatization project is knocked sky high, in
more senses than one!"

There was no doubt of the poor dog's death. The expression of Ardan's
countenance, as he looked at his friends, was of a very rueful order.

"Well," said the practical Barbican, "there's no help for that now; the
next thing to be done is to get rid of the body. We can't keep it here
with us forty-eight hours longer."

"Of course not," replied the Captain, "nor need we; our lights, being
provided with hinges, can be lifted back. What is to prevent us from
opening one of them, and flinging the body out through it!"

The President of the Gun Club reflected a few minutes; then he spoke:

"Yes, it can be done; but we must take the most careful precautions."

"Why so?" asked Ardan.

"For two simple reasons;" replied Barbican; "the first refers to the air
enclosed in the Projectile, and of which we must be very careful to lose
only the least possible quantity."

"But as we manufacture air ourselves!" objected Ardan.

"We manufacture air only partly, friend Michael," replied Barbican. "We
manufacture only oxygen; we can't supply nitrogen--By the bye, Ardan,
won't you watch the apparatus carefully every now and then to see that
the oxygen is not generated too freely. Very serious consequences would
attend an immoderate supply of oxygen--No, we can't manufacture
nitrogen, which is so absolutely necessary for our air and which might
escape readily through the open windows."

"What! the few seconds we should require for flinging out poor
Satellite?"

"A very few seconds indeed they should be," said Barbican, very gravely.

"Your second reason?" asked Ardan.

"The second reason is, that we must not allow the external cold, which
must be exceedingly great, to penetrate into our Projectile and freeze
us alive."

"But the Sun, you know--"

"Yes, the Sun heats our Projectile, but it does not heat the vacuum
through which we are now floating. Where there is no air there can
neither be heat nor light; just as wherever the rays of the Sun do not
arrive directly, it must be both cold and dark. The temperature around
us, if there be anything that can be called temperature, is produced
solely by stellar radiation. I need not say how low that is in the
scale, or that it would be the temperature to which our Earth should
fall, if the Sun were suddenly extinguished."

"Little fear of that for a few more million years," said M'Nicholl.

"Who can tell?" asked Ardan. "Besides, even admitting that the Sun will
not soon be extinguished, what is to prevent the Earth from shooting
away from him?"

"Let friend Michael speak," said Barbican, with a smile, to the Captain;
"we may learn something."

"Certainly you may," continued the Frenchman, "if you have room for
anything new. Were we not struck by a comet's tail in 1861?"

"So it was said, anyhow," observed the Captain. "I well remember what
nonsense there was in the papers about the 'phosphorescent auroral
glare.'"

"Well," continued the Frenchman, "suppose the comet of 1861 influenced
the Earth by an attraction superior to the Sun's. What would be the
consequence? Would not the Earth follow the attracting body, become its
satellite, and thus at last be dragged off to such a distance that the
Sun's rays could no longer excite heat on her surface?"

"Well, that might possibly occur," said Barbican slowly, "but even then
I question if the consequences would be so terrible as you seem to
apprehend."

"Why not?"

"Because the cold and the heat might still manage to be nearly equalized
on our globe. It has been calculated that, had the Earth been carried
off by the comet of '61, when arrived at her greatest distance, she
would have experienced a temperature hardly sixteen times greater than
the heat we receive from the Moon, which, as everybody knows, produces
no appreciable effect, even when concentrated to a focus by the most
powerful lenses."

"Well then," exclaimed Ardan, "at such a temperature--"

"Wait a moment," replied Barbican. "Have you never heard of the
principle of compensation? Listen to another calculation. Had the Earth
been dragged along with the comet, it has been calculated that at her
perihelion, or nearest point to the Sun, she would have to endure a heat
28,000 times greater than our mean summer temperature. But this heat,
fully capable of turning the rocks into glass and the oceans into vapor,
before proceeding to such extremity, must have first formed a thick
interposing ring of clouds, and thus considerably modified the excessive
temperature. Therefore, between the extreme cold of the aphelion and the
excessive heat of the perihelion, by the great law of compensation, it
is probable that the mean temperature would be tolerably endurable."

"At how many degrees is the temperature of the interplanetary space
estimated?" asked M'Nicholl.

"Some time ago," replied Barbican, "this temperature was considered to
be very low indeed--millions and millions of degrees below zero. But
Fourrier of Auxerre, a distinguished member of the _Académie des
Sciences_, whose _Mémoires_ on the temperature of the Planetary spaces
appeared about 1827, reduced these figures to considerably diminished
proportions. According to his careful estimation, the temperature of
space is not much lower than 70 or 80 degrees Fahr. below zero."

"No more?" asked Ardan.

"No more," answered Barbican, "though I must acknowledge we have only
his word for it, as the _Mémoire_ in which he had recorded all the
elements of that important determination, has been lost somewhere, and
is no longer to be found."

"I don't attach the slightest importance to his, or to any man's words,
unless they are sustained by reliable evidence," exclaimed M'Nicholl.
"Besides, if I'm not very much mistaken, Pouillet--another countryman of
yours, Ardan, and an Academician as well as Fourrier--esteems the
temperature of interplanetary spaces to be at least 256° Fahr. below
zero. This we can easily verify for ourselves this moment by actual
experiment."

"Not just now exactly," observed Barbican, "for the solar rays,
striking our Projectile directly, would give us a very elevated instead
of a very low temperature. But once arrived at the Moon, during those
nights fifteen days long, which each of her faces experiences
alternately, we shall have plenty of time to make an experiment with
every condition in our favor. To be sure, our Satellite is at present
moving in a vacuum."

"A vacuum?" asked Ardan; "a perfect vacuum?"

"Well, a perfect vacuum as far as air is concerned."

"But is the air replaced by nothing?"

"Oh yes," replied Barbican. "By ether."

"Ah, ether! and what, pray, is ether?"

"Ether, friend Michael, is an elastic gas consisting of imponderable
atoms, which, as we are told by works on molecular physics, are, in
proportion to their size, as far apart as the celestial bodies are from
each other in space. This distance is less than the 1/3000000 x 1/1000',
or the one trillionth of a foot. The vibrations of the molecules of this
ether produce the sensations of light and heat, by making 430 trillions
of undulations per second, each undulation being hardly more than the
one ten-millionth of an inch in width."

"Trillions per second! ten-millionths of an inch in width!" cried Ardan.
"These oscillations have been very neatly counted and ticketed, and
checked off! Ah, friend Barbican," continued the Frenchman, shaking his
head, "these numbers are just tremendous guesses, frightening the ear
but revealing nothing to the intelligence."

"To get ideas, however, we must calculate--"

"No, no!" interrupted Ardan: "not calculate, but compare. A trillion
tells you nothing--Comparison, everything. For instance, you say, the
volume of _Uranus_ is 76 times greater than the Earth's; _Saturn's_ 900
times greater; _Jupiter's_ 1300 times greater; the Sun's 1300 thousand
times greater--You may tell me all that till I'm tired hearing it, and I
shall still be almost as ignorant as ever. For my part I prefer to be
told one of those simple comparisons that I find in the old almanacs:
The Sun is a globe two feet in diameter; _Jupiter_, a good sized orange;
_Saturn_, a smaller orange; _Neptune_, a plum; _Uranus_, a good sized
cherry; the Earth, a pea; _Venus_, also a pea but somewhat smaller;
_Mars_, a large pin's head; _Mercury_, a mustard seed; _Juno_,
_Ceres_, _Vesta_, _Pallas_, and the other asteroids so many grains
of sand. Be told something like that, and you have got at least the tail
of an idea!"

This learned burst of Ardan's had the natural effect of making his
hearers forget what they had been arguing about, and they therefore
proceeded at once to dispose of Satellite's body. It was a simple matter
enough--no more than to fling it out of the Projectile into space, just
as the sailors get rid of a dead body by throwing it into the sea. Only
in this operation they had to act, as Barbican recommended, with the
utmost care and dispatch, so as to lose as little as possible of the
internal air, which, by its great elasticity, would violently strive to
escape. The bolts of the floor-light, which was more than a foot in
diameter, were carefully unscrewed, while Ardan, a good deal affected,
prepared to launch his dog's body into space. The glass, worked by a
powerful lever which enabled it to overcome the pressure of the enclosed
air, turned quickly on its hinges, and poor Satellite was dropped out.
The whole operation was so well managed that very little air escaped,
and ever afterwards Barbican employed the same means to rid the
Projectile of all the litter and other useless matter by which it was
occasionally encumbered.

The evening of this third of December wore away without further
incident. As soon as Barbican had announced that the Projectile was
still winging its way, though with retarded velocity, towards the lunar
disc, the travellers quietly retired to rest.

[Illustration: POOR SATELLITE WAS DROPPED OUT.]




CHAPTER VI.

INSTRUCTIVE CONVERSATION.


On the fourth of December, the Projectile chronometers marked five
o'clock in the morning, just as the travellers woke up from a pleasant
slumber. They had now been 54 hours on their journey. As to lapse of
_time_, they had passed not much more than half of the number of hours
during which their trip was to last; but, as to lapse of _space_, they
had already accomplished very nearly the seven-tenths of their passage.
This difference between time and distance was due to the regular
retardation of their velocity.

They looked at the earth through the floor-light, but it was little more
than visible--a black spot drowned in the solar rays. No longer any sign
of a crescent, no longer any sign of ashy light. Next day, towards
midnight, the Earth was to be _new_, at the precise moment when the Moon
was to be _full_. Overhead, they could see the Queen of Night coming
nearer and nearer to the line followed by the Projectile, and evidently
approaching the point where both should meet at the appointed moment.
All around, the black vault of heaven was dotted with luminous points
which seemed to move somewhat, though, of course, in their extreme
distance their relative size underwent no change. The Sun and the stars
looked exactly as they had appeared when observed from the Earth. The
Moon indeed had become considerably enlarged in size, but the
travellers' telescopes were still too weak to enable them to make any
important observation regarding the nature of her surface, or that might
determine her topographical or geological features.

Naturally, therefore, the time slipped away in endless conversation. The
Moon, of course, was the chief topic. Each one contributed his share of
peculiar information, or peculiar ignorance, as the case might be.
Barbican and M'Nicholl always treated the subject gravely, as became
learned scientists, but Ardan preferred to look on things with the eye
of fancy. The Projectile, its situation, its direction, the incidents
possible to occur, the precautions necessary to take in order to break
the fall on the Moon's surface--these and many other subjects furnished
endless food for constant debate and inexhaustible conjectures.

For instance, at breakfast that morning, a question of Ardan's regarding
the Projectile drew from Barbican an answer curious enough to be
reported.

"Suppose, on the night that we were shot up from Stony Hill," said
Ardan, "suppose the Projectile had encountered some obstacle powerful
enough to stop it--what would be the consequence of the sudden halt?"

"But," replied Barbican, "I don't understand what obstacle it could have
met powerful enough to stop it."

"Suppose some obstacle, for the sake of argument," said Ardan.

"Suppose what can't be supposed," replied the matter-of-fact Barbican,
"what cannot possibly be supposed, unless indeed the original impulse
proved too weak. In that case, the velocity would have decreased by
degrees, but the Projectile itself would not have suddenly stopped."

"Suppose it had struck against some body in space."

"What body, for instance?"

"Well, that enormous bolide which we met."

"Oh!" hastily observed the Captain, "the Projectile would have been
dashed into a thousand pieces and we along with it."

"Better than that," observed Barbican; "we should have been burned
alive."

"Burned alive!" laughed Ardan. "What a pity we missed so interesting an
experiment! How I should have liked to find out how it felt!"

"You would not have much time to record your observations, friend
Michael, I assure you," observed Barbican. "The case is plain enough.
Heat and motion are convertible terms. What do we mean by heating water?
Simply giving increased, in fact, violent motion to its molecules."

"Well!" exclaimed the Frenchman, "that's an ingenious theory any how!"

"Not only ingenious but correct, my dear friend, for it completely
explains all the phenomena of caloric. Heat is nothing but molecular
movement, the violent oscillation of the particles of a body. When you
apply the brakes to the train, the train stops. But what has become of
its motion? It turns into heat and makes the brakes hot. Why do people
grease the axles? To hinder them from getting too hot, which they
assuredly would become if friction was allowed to obstruct the motion.
You understand, don't you?"

"Don't I though?" replied Ardan, apparently in earnest. "Let me show you
how thoroughly. When I have been running hard and long, I feel myself
perspiring like a bull and hot as a furnace. Why am I then forced to
stop? Simply because my motion has been transformed into heat! Of
course, I understand all about it!"

Barbican smiled a moment at this comical illustration of his theory and
then went on:

"Accordingly, in case of a collision it would have been all over
instantly with our Projectile. You have seen what becomes of the bullet
that strikes the iron target. It is flattened out of all shape;
sometimes it is even melted into a thin film. Its motion has been turned
into heat. Therefore, I maintain that if our Projectile had struck that
bolide, its velocity, suddenly checked, would have given rise to a heat
capable of completely volatilizing it in less than a second."

"Not a doubt of it!" said the Captain. "President," he added after a
moment, "haven't they calculated what would be the result, if the Earth
were suddenly brought to a stand-still in her journey, through her
orbit?"

"It has been calculated," answered Barbican, "that in such a case so
much heat would be developed as would instantly reduce her to vapor."

"Hm!" exclaimed Ardan; "a remarkably simple way for putting an end to
the world!"

"And supposing the Earth to fall into the Sun?" asked the Captain.

"Such a fall," answered Barbican, "according to the calculations of
Tyndall and Thomson, would develop an amount of heat equal to that
produced by sixteen hundred globes of burning coal, each globe equal in
size to the earth itself. Furthermore such a fall would supply the Sun
with at least as much heat as he expends in a hundred years!"

"A hundred years! Good! Nothing like accuracy!" cried Ardan. "Such
infallible calculators as Messrs. Tyndall and Thomson I can easily
excuse for any airs they may give themselves. They must be of an order
much higher than that of ordinary mortals like us!"

"I would not answer myself for the accuracy of such intricate problems,"
quietly observed Barbican; "but there is no doubt whatever regarding one
fact: motion suddenly interrupted always develops heat. And this has
given rise to another theory regarding the maintenance of the Sun's
temperature at a constant point. An incessant rain of bolides falling on
his surface compensates sufficiently for the heat that he is
continually giving forth. It has been calculated--"

"Good Lord deliver us!" cried Ardan, putting his hands to his ears:
"here comes Tyndall and Thomson again!"

--"It has been calculated," continued Barbican, not heeding the
interruption, "that the shock of every bolide drawn to the Sun's surface
by gravity, must produce there an amount of heat equal to that of the
combustion of four thousand blocks of coal, each the same size as the
falling bolide."

"I'll wager another cent that our bold savants calculated the heat of
the Sun himself," cried Ardan, with an incredulous laugh.

"That is precisely what they have done," answered Barbican referring to
his memorandum book; "the heat emitted by the Sun," he continued, "is
exactly that which would be produced by the combustion of a layer of
coal enveloping the Sun's surface, like an atmosphere, 17 miles in
thickness."

"Well done! and such heat would be capable of--?"

"Of melting in an hour a stratum of ice 2400 feet thick, or, according
to another calculation, of raising a globe of ice-cold water, 3 times
the size of our Earth, to the boiling point in an hour."

"Why not calculate the exact fraction of a second it would take to cook
a couple of eggs?" laughed Ardan. "I should as soon believe in one
calculation as in the other.--But--by the by--why does not such extreme
heat cook us all up like so many beefsteaks?"

"For two very good and sufficient reasons," answered Barbican. "In the
first place, the terrestrial atmosphere absorbs the 4/10 of the solar
heat. In the second, the quantity of solar heat intercepted by the Earth
is only about the two billionth part of all that is radiated."

"How fortunate to have such a handy thing as an atmosphere around us,"
cried the Frenchman; "it not only enables us to breathe, but it actually
keeps us from sizzling up like griskins."

"Yes," said the Captain, "but unfortunately we can't say so much for the
Moon."

"Oh pshaw!" cried Ardan, always full of confidence. "It's all right
there too! The Moon is either inhabited or she is not. If she is, the
inhabitants must breathe. If she is not, there must be oxygen enough
left for we, us and co., even if we should have to go after it to the
bottom of the ravines, where, by its gravity, it must have accumulated!
So much the better! we shall not have to climb those thundering
mountains!"

So saying, he jumped up and began to gaze with considerable interest on
the lunar disc, which just then was glittering with dazzling brightness.

"By Jove!" he exclaimed at length; "it must be pretty hot up there!"

"I should think so," observed the Captain; "especially when you remember
that the day up there lasts 360 hours!"

"Yes," observed Barbican, "but remember on the other hand that the
nights are just as long, and, as the heat escapes by radiation, the mean
temperature cannot be much greater than that of interplanetary space."

"A high old place for living in!" cried Ardan. "No matter! I wish we
were there now! Wouldn't it be jolly, dear boys, to have old Mother
Earth for our Moon, to see her always on our sky, never rising, never
setting, never undergoing any change except from New Earth to Last
Quarter! Would not it be fun to trace the shape of our great Oceans and
Continents, and to say: 'there is the Mediterranean! there is China!
there is the gulf of Mexico! there is the white line of the Rocky
Mountains where old Marston is watching for us with his big telescope!'
Then we should see every line, and brightness, and shadow fade away by
degrees, as she came nearer and nearer to the Sun, until at last she sat
completely lost in his dazzling rays! But--by the way--Barbican, are
there any eclipses in the Moon?"

"O yes; solar eclipses" replied Barbican, "must always occur whenever
the centres of the three heavenly bodies are in the same line, the Earth
occupying the middle place. However, such eclipses must always be
annular, as the Earth, projected like a screen on the solar disc, allows
more than half of the Sun to be still visible."

"How is that?" asked M'Nicholl, "no total eclipses in the Moon? Surely
the cone of the Earth's shadow must extend far enough to envelop her
surface?"

"It does reach her, in one sense," replied Barbican, "but it does not in
another. Remember the great refraction of the solar rays that must be
produced by the Earth's atmosphere. It is easy to show that this
refraction prevents the Sun from ever being totally invisible. See
here!" he continued, pulling out his tablets, "Let _a_ represent the
horizontal parallax, and _b_ the half of the Sun's apparent diameter--"

"Ouch!" cried the Frenchman, making a wry face, "here comes Mr. _x_
square riding to the mischief on a pair of double zeros again! Talk
English, or Yankee, or Dutch, or Greek, and I'm your man! Even a little
Arabic I can digest! But hang me, if I can endure your Algebra!"

"Well then, talking Yankee," replied Barbican with a smile, "the mean
distance of the Moon from the Earth being sixty terrestrial radii, the
length of the conic shadow, in consequence of atmospheric refraction, is
reduced to less than forty-two radii. Consequently, at the moment of an
eclipse, the Moon is far beyond the reach of the real shadow, so that
she can see not only the border rays of the Sun, but even those
proceeding from his very centre."

"Oh then," cried Ardan with a loud laugh, "we have an eclipse of the Sun
at the moment when the Sun is quite visible! Isn't that very like a
bull, Mr. Philosopher Barbican?"

"Yet it is perfectly true notwithstanding," answered Barbican. "At such
a moment the Sun is not eclipsed, because we can see him: and then again
he is eclipsed because we see him only by means of a few of his rays,
and even these have lost nearly all their brightness in their passage
through the terrestrial atmosphere!"

"Barbican is right, friend Michael," observed the Captain slowly: "the
same phenomenon occurs on earth every morning at sunrise, when
refraction shows us

                           '_the Sun new ris'n
    Looking through the horizontal misty air,
    Shorn of his beams._'"

"He must be right," said Ardan, who, to do him justice, though quick at
seeing a reason, was quicker to acknowledge its justice: "yes, he must
be right, because I begin to understand at last very clearly what he
really meant. However, we can judge for ourselves when we get
there.--But, apropos of nothing, tell me, Barbican, what do you think of
the Moon being an ancient comet, which had come so far within the sphere
of the Earth's attraction as to be kept there and turned into a
satellite?"

"Well, that _is_ an original idea!" said Barbican with a smile.

"My ideas generally are of that category," observed Ardan with an
affectation of dry pomposity.

"Not this time, however, friend Michael," observed M'Nicholl.

"Oh! I'm a plagiarist, am I?" asked the Frenchman, pretending to be
irritated.

"Well, something very like it," observed M'Nicholl quietly. "Apollonius
Rhodius, as I read one evening in the Philadelphia Library, speaks of
the Arcadians of Greece having a tradition that their ancestors were so
ancient that they inhabited the Earth long before the Moon had ever
become our satellite. They therefore called them [Greek: _Proselênoi_]
or _Ante-lunarians_. Now starting with some such wild notion as this,
certain scientists have looked on the Moon as an ancient comet brought
close enough to the Earth to be retained in its orbit by terrestrial
attraction."

"Why may not there be something plausible in such a hypothesis?" asked
Ardan with some curiosity.

"There is nothing whatever in it," replied Barbican decidedly: "a simple
proof is the fact that the Moon does not retain the slightest trace of
the vaporous envelope by which comets are always surrounded."

"Lost her tail you mean," said Ardan. "Pooh! Easy to account for that!
It might have got cut off by coming too close to the Sun!"

"It might, friend Michael, but an amputation by such means is not very
likely."

"No? Why not?"

"Because--because--By Jove, I can't say, because I don't know," cried
Barbican with a quiet smile on his countenance.

"Oh what a lot of volumes," cried Ardan, "could be made out of what we
don't know!"

"At present, for instance," observed M'Nicholl, "I don't know what
o'clock it is."

"Three o'clock!" said Barbican, glancing at his chronometer.

"No!" cried Ardan in surprise. "Bless us! How rapidly the time passes
when we are engaged in scientific conversation! Ouf! I'm getting
decidedly too learned! I feel as if I had swallowed a library!"

"I feel," observed M'Nicholl, "as if I had been listening to a lecture
on Astronomy in the _Star_ course."

"Better stir around a little more," said the Frenchman; "fatigue of body
is the best antidote to such severe mental labor as ours. I'll run up
the ladder a bit." So saying, he paid another visit to the upper portion
of the Projectile and remained there awhile whistling _Malbrouk_, whilst
his companions amused themselves in looking through the floor window.

Ardan was coming down the ladder, when his whistling was cut short by a
sudden exclamation of surprise.

"What's the matter?" asked Barbican quickly, as he looked up and saw the
Frenchman pointing to something outside the Projectile.

Approaching the window, Barbican saw with much surprise a sort of
flattened bag floating in space and only a few yards off. It seemed
perfectly motionless, and, consequently, the travellers knew that it
must be animated by the same ascensional movement as themselves.

"What on earth can such a consarn be, Barbican?" asked Ardan, who every
now and then liked to ventilate his stock of American slang. "Is it one
of those particles of meteoric matter you were speaking of just now,
caught within the sphere of our Projectile's attraction and accompanying
us to the Moon?"

"What I am surprised at," observed the Captain, "is that though the
specific gravity of that body is far inferior to that of our Projectile,
it moves with exactly the same velocity."

"Captain," said Barbican, after a moment's reflection, "I know no more
what that object is than you do, but I can understand very well why it
keeps abreast with the Projectile."

"Very well then, why?"

"Because, my dear Captain, we are moving through a vacuum, and because
all bodies fall or move--the same thing--with equal velocity through a
vacuum, no matter what may be their shape or their specific gravity. It
is the air alone that makes a difference of weight. Produce an
artificial vacuum in a glass tube and you will see that all objects
whatever falling through, whether bits of feather or grains of shot,
move with precisely the same rapidity. Up here, in space, like cause and
like effect."

"Correct," assented M'Nicholl. "Everything therefore that we shall throw
out of the Projectile is bound to accompany us to the Moon."

"Well, we _were_ smart!" cried Ardan suddenly.

"How so, friend Michael?" asked Barbican.

"Why not have packed the Projectile with ever so many useful objects,
books, instruments, tools, et cetera, and fling them out into space once
we were fairly started! They would have all followed us safely! Nothing
would have been lost! And--now I think on it--why not fling ourselves
out through the window? Shouldn't we be as safe out there as that
bolide? What fun it would be to feel ourselves sustained and upborne in
the ether, more highly favored even than the birds, who must keep on
flapping their wings continually to prevent themselves from falling!"

"Very true, my dear boy," observed Barbican; "but how could we breathe?"

"It's a fact," exclaimed the Frenchman. "Hang the air for spoiling our
fun! So we must remain shut up in our Projectile?"

"Not a doubt of it!"

--"Oh Thunder!" roared Ardan, suddenly striking his forehead.

"What ails you?" asked the Captain, somewhat surprised.

"Now I know what that bolide of ours is! Why didn't we think of it
before? It is no asteroid! It is no particle of meteoric matter! Nor is
it a piece of a shattered planet!"

"What is it then?" asked both of his companions in one voice.

[Illustration: SATELLITE'S BODY FLYING THROUGH SPACE.]

"It is nothing more or less than the body of the dog that we threw out
yesterday!"

So in fact it was. That shapeless, unrecognizable mass, melted,
expunged, flat as a bladder under an unexhausted receiver, drained of
its air, was poor Satellite's body, flying like a rocket through space,
and rising higher and higher in close company with the rapidly ascending
Projectile!




CHAPTER VII.

A HIGH OLD TIME.


A new phenomenon, therefore, strange but logical, startling but
admitting of easy explanation, was now presented to their view,
affording a fresh subject for lively discussion. Not that they disputed
much about it. They soon agreed on a principle from which they readily
deducted the following general law: _Every object thrown out of the
Projectile should partake of the Projectile's motion: it should
therefore follow the same path, and never cease to move until the
Projectile itself came to a stand-still._

But, in sober truth, they were at anything but a loss of subjects of
warm discussion. As the end of their journey began to approach, their
senses became keener and their sensations vivider. Steeled against
surprise, they looked for the unexpected, the strange, the startling;
and the only thing at which they would have wondered would be to be five
minutes without having something new to wonder at. Their excited
imaginations flew far ahead of the Projectile, whose velocity, by the
way, began to be retarded very decidedly by this time, though, of
course, the travellers had as yet no means to become aware of it. The
Moon's size on the sky was meantime getting larger and larger; her
apparent distance was growing shorter and shorter, until at last they
could almost imagine that by putting their hands out they could nearly
touch her.

Next morning, December 5th, all were up and dressed at a very early
hour. This was to be the last day of their journey, if all calculations
were correct. That very night, at 12 o'clock, within nineteen hours at
furthest, at the very moment of Full Moon, they were to reach her
resplendent surface. At that hour was to be completed the most
extraordinary journey ever undertaken by man in ancient or modern times.
Naturally enough, therefore, they found themselves unable to sleep after
four o'clock in the morning; peering upwards through the windows now
visibly glittering under the rays of the Moon, they spent some very
exciting hours in gazing at her slowly enlarging disc, and shouting at
her with confident and joyful hurrahs.

The majestic Queen of the Stars had now risen so high in the spangled
heavens that she could hardly rise higher. In a few degrees more she
would reach the exact point of space where her junction with the
Projectile was to be effected. According to his own observations,
Barbican calculated that they should strike her in the northern
hemisphere, where her plains, or _seas_ as they are called, are immense,
and her mountains are comparatively rare. This, of course, would be so
much the more favorable, if, as was to be apprehended, the lunar
atmosphere was confined exclusively to the low lands.

"Besides," as Ardan observed, "a plain is a more suitable landing place
than a mountain. A Selenite deposited on the top of Mount Everest or
even on Mont Blanc, could hardly be considered, in strict language, to
have arrived on Earth."

"Not to talk," added M'Nicholl, "of the comfort of the thing! When you
land on a plain, there you are. When you land on a peak or on a steep
mountain side, where are you? Tumbling over an embankment with the train
going forty miles an hour, would be nothing to it."

"Therefore, Captain Barbican," cried the Frenchman, "as we should like
to appear before the Selenites in full skins, please land us in the snug
though unromantic North. We shall have time enough to break our necks in
the South."

Barbican made no reply to his companions, because a new reflection had
begun to trouble him, to talk about which would have done no good. There
was certainly something wrong. The Projectile was evidently heading
towards the northern hemisphere of the Moon. What did this prove?
Clearly, a deviation resulting from some cause. The bullet, lodged,
aimed, and fired with the most careful mathematical precision, had been
calculated to reach the very centre of the Moon's disc. Clearly it was
not going to the centre now. What could have produced the deviation?
This Barbican could not tell; nor could he even determine its extent,
having no points of sight by which to make his observations. For the
present he tried to console himself with the hope that the deviation of
the Projectile would be followed by no worse consequence than carrying
them towards the northern border of the Moon, where for several reasons
it would be comparatively easier to alight. Carefully avoiding,
therefore, the use of any expression which might needlessly alarm his
companions, he continued to observe the Moon as carefully as he could,
hoping every moment to find some grounds for believing that the
deviation from the centre was only a slight one. He almost shuddered at
the thought of what would be their situation, if the bullet, missing its
aim, should pass the Moon, and plunge into the interplanetary space
beyond it.

As he continued to gaze, the Moon, instead of presenting the usual
flatness of her disc, began decidedly to show a surface somewhat convex.
Had the Sun been shining on her obliquely, the shadows would have
certainly thrown the great mountains into strong relief. The eye could
then bury itself deep in the yawning chasms of the craters, and easily
follow the cracks, streaks, and ridges which stripe, flecker, and bar
the immensity of her plains. But for the present all relief was lost in
the dazzling glare. The Captain could hardly distinguish even those dark
spots that impart to the full Moon some resemblance to the human face.

"Face!" cried Ardan: "well, a very fanciful eye may detect a face,
though, for the sake of Apollo's beauteous sister, I regret to say, a
terribly pockmarked one!"

The travellers, now evidently approaching the end of their journey,
observed the rapidly increasing world above them with newer and greater
curiosity every moment. Their fancies enkindled at the sight of the new
and strange scenes dimly presented to their view. In imagination they
climbed to the summit of this lofty peak. They let themselves down to
the abyss of that yawning crater. Here they imagined they saw vast seas
hardly kept in their basins by a rarefied atmosphere; there they thought
they could trace mighty rivers bearing to vast oceans the tribute of the
snowy mountains. In the first promptings of their eager curiosity, they
peered greedily into her cavernous depths, and almost expected, amidst
the deathlike hush of inaudible nature, to surprise some sound from the
mystic orb floating up there in eternal silence through a boundless
ocean of never ending vacuum.

This last day of their journey left their memories stored with thrilling
recollections. They took careful note of the slightest details. As they
neared their destination, they felt themselves invaded by a vague,
undefined restlessness. But this restlessness would have given way to
decided uneasiness, if they had known at what a slow rate they were
travelling. They would have surely concluded that their present velocity
would never be able to take them as far as the neutral point, not to
talk of passing it. The reason of such considerable retardation was,
that by this time the Projectile had reached such a great distance from
the Earth that it had hardly any weight. But even this weight, such as
it was, was to be diminished still further, and finally, to vanish
altogether as soon as the bullet reached the neutral point, where the
two attractions, terrestrial and lunar, should counteract each other
with new and surprising effects.

Notwithstanding the absorbing nature of his observations, Ardan never
forgot to prepare breakfast with his usual punctuality. It was eaten
readily and relished heartily. Nothing could be more exquisite than his
calf's foot jelly liquefied and prepared by gas heat, except perhaps his
meat biscuits of preserved Texas beef and Southdown mutton. A bottle of
Château Yquem and another of Clos de Vougeot, both of superlative
excellence in quality and flavor, crowned the repast. Their vicinity to
the Moon and their incessant glancing at her surface did not prevent the
travellers from touching each other's glasses merrily and often. Ardan
took occasion to remark that the lunar vineyards--if any existed--must
be magnificent, considering the intense solar heat they continually
experienced. Not that he counted on them too confidently, for he told
his friends that to provide for the worst he had supplied himself with a
few cases of the best vintages of Médoc and the Côte d'Or, of which the
bottles, then under discussion, might be taken as very favorable
specimens.

The Reiset and Regnault apparatus for purifying the air worked
splendidly, and maintained the atmosphere in a perfectly sanitary
condition. Not an atom of carbonic acid could resist the caustic potash;
and as for the oxygen, according to M'Nicholl's expression, "it was A
prime number one!"

The small quantity of watery vapor enclosed in the Projectile did no
more harm than serving to temper the dryness of the air: many a splendid
_salon_ in New York, London, or Paris, and many an auditorium, even of
theatre, opera house or Academy of Music, could be considered its
inferior in what concerned its hygienic condition.

To keep it in perfect working order, the apparatus should be carefully
attended to. This, Ardan looked on as his own peculiar occupation. He
was never tired regulating the tubes, trying the taps, and testing the
heat of the gas by the pyrometer. So far everything had worked
satisfactorily, and the travellers, following the example of their
friend Marston on a previous occasion, began to get so stout that their
own mothers would not know them in another month, should their
imprisonment last so long. Ardan said they all looked so sleek and
thriving that he was reminded forcibly of a nice lot of pigs fattening
in a pen for a country fair. But how long was this good fortune of
theirs going to last?

Whenever they took their eyes off the Moon, they could not help noticing
that they were still attended outside by the spectre of Satellite's
corpse and by the other refuse of the Projectile. An occasional
melancholy howl also attested Diana's recognition of her companion's
unhappy fate. The travellers saw with surprise that these waifs still
seemed perfectly motionless in space, and kept their respective
distances apart as mathematically as if they had been fastened with
nails to a stone wall.

"I tell you what, dear boys;" observed Ardan, commenting on this curious
phenomenon; "if the concussion had been a little too violent for one of
us that night, his survivors would have been seriously embarrassed in
trying to get rid of his remains. With no earth to cover him up, no sea
to plunge him into, his corpse would never disappear from view, but
would pursue us day and night, grim and ghastly like an avenging ghost!"

"Ugh!" said the Captain, shuddering at the idea.

"But, by the bye, Barbican!" cried the Frenchman, dropping the subject
with his usual abruptness; "you have forgotten something else! Why
didn't you bring a scaphander and an air pump? I could then venture out
of the Projectile as readily and as safely as the diver leaves his boat
and walks about on the bottom of the river! What fun to float in the
midst of that mysterious ether! to steep myself, aye, actually to revel
in the pure rays of the glorious sun! I should have ventured out on the
very point of the Projectile, and there I should have danced and
postured and kicked and bobbed and capered in a style that Taglioni
never dreamed of!"

"Shouldn't I like to see you!" cried the Captain grimly, smiling at the
idea.

"You would not see him long!" observed Barbican quietly. "The air
confined in his body, freed from external pressure, would burst him like
a shell, or like a balloon that suddenly rises to too great a height in
the air! A scaphander would have been a fatal gift. Don't regret its
absence, friend Michael; never forget this axiom: _As long as we are
floating in empty space, the only spot where safety is possible is
inside the Projectile!_"

The words "possible" and "impossible" always grated on Ardan's ears. If
he had been a lexicographer, he would have rigidly excluded them from
his dictionary, both as meaningless and useless. He was preparing an
answer for Barbican, when he was cut out by a sudden observation from
M'Nicholl.

"See here, friends!" cried the Captain; "this going to the Moon is all
very well, but how shall we get back?"

His listeners looked at each other with a surprised and perplexed air.
The question, though a very natural one, now appeared to have presented
itself to their consideration absolutely for the first time.

"What do you mean by such a question, Captain?" asked Barbican in a
grave judicial tone.

"Mac, my boy," said Ardan seriously, "don't it strike you as a little
out of order to ask how you are to return when you have not got there
yet?"

"I don't ask the question with any idea of backing out," observed the
Captain quietly; "as a matter of purely scientific inquiry, I repeat my
question: how are we to return?"

"I don't know," replied Barbican promptly.

"For my part," said Ardan; "if I had known how to get back, I should
have never come at all!"

"Well! of all the answers!" said the Captain, lifting his hands and
shaking his head.

"The best under the circumstances;" observed Barbican; "and I shall
further observe that such a question as yours at present is both useless
and uncalled for. On some future occasion, when we shall consider it
advisable to return, the question will be in order, and we shall discuss
it with all the attention it deserves. Though the Columbiad is at Stony
Hill, the Projectile will still be in the Moon."

"Much we shall gain by that! A bullet without a gun!"

"The gun we can make and the powder too!" replied Barbican confidently.
"Metal and sulphur and charcoal and saltpetre are likely enough to be
present in sufficient quantities beneath the Moon's surface. Besides, to
return is a problem of comparatively easy solution: we should have to
overcome the lunar attraction only--a slight matter--the rest of the
business would be readily done by gravity."

"Enough said on the subject!" exclaimed Ardan curtly; "how to get back
is indefinitely postponed! How to communicate with our friends on the
Earth, is another matter, and, as it seems to me, an extremely easy
one."

"Let us hear the very easy means by which you propose to communicate
with our friends on Earth," asked the Captain, with a sneer, for he was
by this time a little out of humor.

"By means of bolides ejected from the lunar volcanoes," replied the
Frenchman without an instant's hesitation.

"Well said, friend Ardan," exclaimed Barbican. "I am quite disposed to
acknowledge the feasibility of your plan. Laplace has calculated that a
force five times greater than that of an ordinary cannon would be
sufficient to send a bolide from the Moon to the Earth. Now there is no
cannon that can vie in force with even the smallest volcano."

"Hurrah!" cried Ardan, delighted at his success; "just imagine the
pleasure of sending our letters postage free! But--oh! what a splendid
idea!--Dolts that we were for not thinking of it sooner!"

"Let us have the splendid idea!" cried the Captain, with some of his old
acrimony.

"Why didn't we fasten a wire to the Projectile?" asked Ardan,
triumphantly, "It would have enabled us to exchange telegrams with the
Earth!"

"Ho! ho! ho!" roared the Captain, rapidly recovering his good humor;
"decidedly the best joke of the season! Ha! ha! ha! Of course you have
calculated the weight of a wire 240 thousand miles long?"

"No matter about its weight!" cried the Frenchman impetuously; "we
should have laughed at its weight! We could have tripled the charge of
the Columbiad; we could have quadrupled it!--aye, quintupled it, if
necessary!" he added in tones evidently increasing in loudness and
violence.

"Yes, friend Michael," observed Barbican; "but there is a slight and
unfortunately a fatal defect in your project. The Earth, by its
rotation, would have wrapped our wire around herself, like thread around
a spool, and dragged us back almost with the speed of lightning!"

"By the Nine gods of Porsena!" cried Ardan, "something is wrong with my
head to-day! My brain is out of joint, and I am making as nice a mess of
things as my friend Marston was ever capable of! By the bye--talking of
Marston--if we never return to the Earth, what is to prevent him from
following us to the Moon?"

"Nothing!" replied Barbican; "he is a faithful friend and a reliable
comrade. Besides, what is easier? Is not the Columbiad still at Stony
Hill? Cannot gun-cotton be readily manufactured on any occasion? Will
not the Moon again pass through the zenith of Florida? Eighteen years
from now, will she not occupy exactly the same spot that she does
to-day?"

"Certainly!" cried Ardan, with increasing enthusiasm, "Marston will
come! and Elphinstone of the torpedo! and the gallant Bloomsbury, and
Billsby the brave, and all our friends of the Baltimore Gun Club! And we
shall receive them with all the honors! And then we shall establish
projectile trains between the Earth and the Moon! Hurrah for J.T.
Marston!"

"Hurrah for Secretary Marston!" cried the Captain, with an enthusiasm
almost equal to Ardan's.

"Hurrah for my dear friend Marston!" cried Barbican, hardly less
excited than his comrades.

Our old acquaintance, Marston, of course could not have heard the joyous
acclamations that welcomed his name, but at that moment he certainly
must have felt his ears most unaccountably tingling. What was he doing
at the time? He was rattling along the banks of the Kansas River, as
fast as an express train could take him, on the road to Long's Peak,
where, by means of the great Telescope, he expected to find some traces
of the Projectile that contained his friends. He never forgot them for a
moment, but of course he little dreamed that his name at that very time
was exciting their vividest recollections and their warmest applause.

In fact, their recollections were rather too vivid, and their applause
decidedly too warm. Was not the animation that prevailed among the
guests of the Projectile of a very unusual character, and was it not
becoming more and more violent every moment? Could the wine have caused
it? No; though not teetotallers, they never drank to excess. Could the
Moon's proximity, shedding her subtle, mysterious influence over their
nervous systems, have stimulated them to a degree that was threatening
to border on frenzy? Their faces were as red as if they were standing
before a hot fire; their breathing was loud, and their lungs heaved like
a smith's bellows; their eyes blazed like burning coals; their voices
sounded as loud and harsh as that of a stump speaker trying to make
himself heard by an inattentive or hostile crowd; their words popped
from their lips like corks from Champagne bottles; their gesticulating
became wilder and in fact more alarming--considering the little room
left in the Projectile for muscular displays of any kind.

But the most extraordinary part of the whole phenomenon was that neither
of them, not even Barbican, had the slightest consciousness of any
strange or unusual ebullition of spirits either on his own part or on
that of the others.

"See here, gentlemen!" said the Captain in a quick imperious manner--the
roughness of his old life on the Mississippi would still break out--"See
here, gentlemen! It seems I'm not to know if we are to return from the
Moon. Well!--Pass that for the present! But there is one thing I _must_
know!"

"Hear! hear the Captain!" cried Barbican, stamping with his foot, like
an excited fencing master. "There is one thing he _must_ know!"

"I want to know what we're going to do when we get there!"

"He wants to know what we're going to do when we get there! A sensible
question! Answer it, Ardan!"

"Answer it yourself, Barbican! You know more about the Moon than I do!
You know more about it than all the Nasmyths that ever lived!"

"I'm blessed if I know anything at all about it!" cried Barbican, with a
joyous laugh. "Ha, ha, ha! The first eastern shore Marylander or any
other simpleton you meet in Baltimore, knows as much about the Moon as
I do! Why we're going there, I can't tell! What we're going to do when
we get there, can't tell either! Ardan knows all about it! He can tell!
He's taking us there!"

"Certainly I can tell! should I have offered to take you there without a
good object in view?" cried Ardan, husky with continual roaring. "Answer
me that!"

"No conundrums!" cried the Captain, in a voice sourer and rougher than
ever; "tell us if you can in plain English, what the demon we have come
here for!"

"I'll tell you if I feel like it," cried Ardan, folding his arms with an
aspect of great dignity; "and I'll not tell you if I don't feel like
it!"

"What's that?" cried Barbican. "You'll not give us an answer when we ask
you a reasonable question?"

"Never!" cried Ardan, with great determination. "I'll never answer a
question reasonable or unreasonable, unless it is asked in a proper
manner!"

"None of your French airs here!" exclaimed M'Nicholl, by this time
almost completely out of himself between anger and excitement. "I don't
know where I am; I don't know where I'm going; I don't know why I'm
going; _you_ know all about it, Ardan, or at least you think you do!
Well then, give me a plain answer to a plain question, or by the
Thirty-eight States of our glorious Union, I shall know what for!"

"Listen, Ardan!" cried Barbican, grappling with the Frenchman, and with
some difficulty restraining him from flying at M'Nicholl's throat; "You
ought to tell him! It is only your duty! One day you found us both in
St. Helena woods, where we had no more idea of going to the Moon than of
sailing to the South Pole! There you twisted us both around your finger,
and induced us to follow you blindly on the most formidable journey ever
undertaken by man! And now you refuse to tell us what it was all for!"

"I don't refuse, dear old Barbican! To you, at least, I can't refuse
anything!" cried Ardan, seizing his friend's hands and wringing them
violently. Then letting them go and suddenly starting back, "you wish to
know," he continued in resounding tones, "why we have followed out the
grandest idea that ever set a human brain on fire! Why we have
undertaken a journey that for length, danger, and novelty, for
fascinating, soul-stirring and delirious sensations, for all that can
attract man's burning heart, and satisfy the intensest cravings of his
intellect, far surpasses the vividest realities of Dante's passionate
dream! Well, I will tell you! It is to annex another World to the New
One! It is to take possession of the Moon in the name of the United
States of America! It is to add a thirty-ninth State to the glorious
Union! It is to colonize the lunar regions, to cultivate them, to people
them, to transport to them some of our wonders of art, science, and
industry! It is to civilize the Selenites, unless they are more
civilized already than we are ourselves! It is to make them all good
Republicans, if they are not so already!"

"Provided, of course, that there are Selenites in existence!" sneered
the Captain, now sourer than ever, and in his unaccountable excitement
doubly irritating.

"Who says there are no Selenites?" cried Ardan fiercely, with fists
clenched and brows contracted.

"I do!" cried M'Nicholl stoutly; "I deny the existence of anything of
the kind, and I denounce every one that maintains any such whim as a
visionary, if not a fool!"

Ardan's reply to this taunt was a desperate facer, which, however,
Barbican managed to stop while on its way towards the Captain's nose.
M'Nicholl, seeing himself struck at, immediately assumed such a posture
of defence as showed him to be no novice at the business. A battle
seemed unavoidable; but even at this trying moment Barbican showed
himself equal to the emergency.

"Stop, you crazy fellows! you ninnyhammers! you overgrown babies!" he
exclaimed, seizing his companions by the collar, and violently swinging
them around with his vast strength until they stood back to back; "what
are you going to fight about? Suppose there are Lunarians in the Moon!
Is that a reason why there should be Lunatics in the Projectile! But,
Ardan, why do you insist on Lunarians? Are we so shiftless that we can't
do without them when we get to the Moon?"

"I don't insist on them!" cried Ardan, who submitted to Barbican like a
child. "Hang the Lunarians! Certainly, we can do without them! What do I
care for them? Down with them!"

"Yes, down with the Lunarians!" cried M'Nicholl as spitefully as if he
had even the slightest belief in their existence.

"We shall take possession of the Moon ourselves!" cried Ardan.
"Lunarians or no Lunarians!"

"We three shall constitute a Republic!" cried M'Nicholl.

"I shall be the House!" cried Ardan.

"And I the Senate!" answered the Captain.

"And Barbican our first President!" shrieked the Frenchman.

"Our first and last!" roared M'Nicholl.

"No objections to a third term!" yelled Ardan.

"He's welcome to any number of terms he pleases!" vociferated M'Nicholl.

"Hurrah for President Barbican of the Lunatic--I mean of the Lunar
Republic!" screamed Ardan.

"Long may he wave, and may his shadow never grow less!" shouted Captain
M'Nicholl, his eyes almost out of their sockets.

Then with voices reminding you of sand fiercely blown against the window
panes, the _President_ and the _Senate_ chanted the immortal _Yankee
Doodle_, whilst the _House_ delivered itself of the _Marseillaise_, in a
style which even the wildest Jacobins in Robespierre's day could hardly
have surpassed.

But long before either song was ended, all three broke out into a
dance, wild, insensate, furious, delirious, paroxysmatical. No Orphic
festivals on Mount Cithaeron ever raged more wildly. No Bacchic revels
on Mount Parnassus were ever more corybantic. Diana, demented by the
maddening example, joined in the orgie, howling and barking frantically
in her turn, and wildly jumping as high as the ceiling of the
Projectile. Then came new accessions to the infernal din. Wings suddenly
began to flutter, cocks to crow, hens to cluck; and five or six
chickens, managing to escape out of their coop, flew backwards and
forwards blindly, with frightened screams, dashing against each other
and against the walls of the Projectile, and altogether getting up as
demoniacal a hullabaloo as could be made by ten thousand bats that you
suddenly disturbed in a cavern where they had slept through the winter.

Then the three companions, no longer able to withstand the overpowering
influence of the mysterious force that mastered them, intoxicated, more
than drunk, burned by the air that scorched their organs of respiration,
dropped at last, and lay flat, motionless, senseless as dabs of clay, on
the floor of the Projectile.

[Illustration: A DEMONIACAL HULLABALOO.]




CHAPTER VIII.

THE NEUTRAL POINT.


What had taken place? Whence proceeded this strange intoxication whose
consequences might have proved so disastrous? A little forgetfulness on
Ardan's part had done the whole mischief, but fortunately M'Nicholl was
able to remedy it in time.

After a regular fainting spell several minutes long, the Captain was the
first man to return to consciousness and the full recovery of his
intellectual faculties. His first feelings were far from pleasant. His
stomach gnawed him as if he had not eaten for a week, though he had
taken breakfast only a few hours before; his eyes were dim, his brain
throbbing, and his limbs shaking. In short, he presented every symptom
usually seen in a man dying of starvation. Picking himself up with much
care and difficulty, he roared out to Ardan for something to eat. Seeing
that the Frenchman was unable or unwilling to respond, he concluded to
help himself, by beginning first of all to prepare a little tea. To do
this, fire was necessary; so, to light his lamp, he struck a match.

But what was his surprise at seeing the sulphur tip of the match blazing
with a light so bright and dazzling that his eyes could hardly bear it!
Touching it to the gas burner, a stream of light flashed forth equal in
its intensity to the flame of an electric lamp. Then he understood it
all in an instant. The dazzling glare, his maddened brain, his gnawing
stomach--all were now clear as the noon-day Sun.

"The oxygen!" he cried, and, suddenly stooping down and examining the
tap of the air apparatus, he saw that it had been only half turned off.
Consequently the air was gradually getting more and more impregnated
with this powerful gas, colorless, odorless, tasteless, infinitely
precious, but, unless when strongly diluted with nitrogen, capable of
producing fatal disorders in the human system. Ardan, startled by
M'Nicholl's question about the means of returning from the Moon, had
turned the cock only half off.

The Captain instantly stopped the escape of the oxygen, but not one
moment too soon. It had completely saturated the atmosphere. A few
minutes more and it would have killed the travellers, not like carbonic
acid, by smothering them, but by burning them up, as a strong draught
burns up the coals in a stove.

[Illustration: "THE OXYGEN!" HE CRIED.]

It took nearly an hour for the air to become pure enough to allow the
lungs their natural play. Slowly and by degrees, the travellers
recovered from their intoxication; they had actually to sleep off the
fumes of the oxygen as a drunkard has to sleep off the effects of his
brandy. When Ardan learned that he was responsible for the whole
trouble, do you think the information disconcerted him? Not a bit of it.
On the contrary, he was rather proud of having done something
startling, to break the monotony of the journey; and to put a little
life, as he said, into old Barbican and the grim Captain, so as to get a
little fun out of such grave philosophers.

After laughing heartily at the comical figure cut by his two friends
capering like crazy students at the _Closerie des Lilas_, he went on
moralizing on the incident:

"For my part, I'm not a bit sorry for having partaken of this fuddling
gas. It gives me an idea, dear boys. Would it not be worth some
enterprising fellow's while to establish a sanatorium provided with
oxygen chambers, where people of a debilitated state of health could
enjoy a few hours of intensely active existence! There's money in it, as
you Americans say. Just suppose balls or parties given in halls where
the air would be provided with an extra supply of this enrapturing gas!
Or, theatres where the atmosphere would be maintained in a highly
oxygenated condition. What passion, what fire in the actors! What
enthusiasm in the spectators! And, carrying the idea a little further,
if, instead of an assembly or an audience, we should oxygenize towns,
cities, a whole country--what activity would be infused into the whole
people! What new life would electrify a stagnant community! Out of an
old used-up nation we could perhaps make a bran-new one, and, for my
part, I know more than one state in old Europe where this oxygen
experiment might be attended with a decided advantage, or where, at all
events, it could do no harm!"

The Frenchman spoke so glibly and gesticulated so earnestly that
M'Nicholl once more gravely examined the stop-cock; but Barbican damped
his enthusiasm by a single observation.

"Friend Michael," said he, "your new and interesting idea we shall
discuss at a more favorable opportunity. At present we want to know
where all these cocks and hens have come from."

"These cocks and hens?"

"Yes."

Ardan threw a glance of comical bewilderment on half a dozen or so of
splendid barn-yard fowls that were now beginning to recover from the
effects of the oxygen. For an instant he could not utter a word; then,
shrugging his shoulders, he muttered in a low voice:

"Catastrophe prematurely exploded!"

"What are you going to do with these chickens?" persisted Barbican.

"Acclimatize them in the Moon, by Jove! what else?" was the ready reply.

"Why conceal them then?"

"A hoax, a poor hoax, dear President, which proves a miserable failure!
I intended to let them loose on the Lunar Continent at the first
favorable opportunity. I often had a good laugh to myself, thinking of
your astonishment and the Captain's at seeing a lot of American poultry
scratching for worms on a Lunar dunghill!"

"Ah! wag, jester, incorrigible _farceur_!" cried Barbican with a smile;
"you want no nitrous oxide to put a bee in your bonnet! He is always as
bad as you and I were for a short time, M'Nicholl, under the laughing
gas! He's never had a sensible moment in his life!"

"I can't say the same of you," replied Ardan; "you had at least one
sensible moment in all your lives, and that was about an hour ago!"

Their incessant chattering did not prevent the friends from at once
repairing the disorder of the interior of the Projectile. Cocks and hens
were put back in their cages. But while doing so, the friends were
astonished to find that the birds, though good sized creatures, and now
pretty fat and plump, hardly felt heavier in their hands than if they
had been so many sparrows. This drew their interested attention to a new
phenomenon.

From the moment they had left the Earth, their own weight, and that of
the Projectile and the objects therein contained, had been undergoing a
progressive diminution. They might never be able to ascertain this fact
with regard to the Projectile, but the moment was now rapidly
approaching when the loss of weight would become perfectly sensible,
both regarding themselves and the tools and instruments surrounding
them. Of course, it is quite clear, that this decrease could not be
indicated by an ordinary scales, as the weight to balance the object
would have lost precisely as much as the object itself. But a spring
balance, for instance, in which the tension of the coil is independent
of attraction, would have readily given the exact equivalent of the
loss.

Attraction or weight, according to Newton's well known law, acting in
direct proportion to the mass of the attracting body and in inverse
proportion to the square of the distance, this consequence clearly
follows: Had the Earth been alone in space, or had the other heavenly
bodies been suddenly annihilated, the further from the Earth the
Projectile would be, the less weight it would have. However, it would
never _entirely_ lose its weight, as the terrestrial attraction would
have always made itself felt at no matter what distance. But as the
Earth is not the only celestial body possessing attraction, it is
evident that there may be a point in space where the respective
attractions may be entirely annihilated by mutual counteraction. Of this
phenomenon the present instance was a case in point. In a short time,
the Projectile and its contents would for a few moments be absolutely
and completely deprived of all weight whatsoever.

The path described by the Projectile was evidently a line from the Earth
to the Moon averaging somewhat less than 240,000 miles in length.
According as the distance between the Projectile and the Earth was
increasing, the terrestrial attraction was diminishing in the ratio of
the square of the distance, and the lunar attraction was augmenting in
the same proportion.

As before observed, the point was not now far off where, the two
attractions counteracting each other, the bullet would actually weigh
nothing at all. If the masses of the Earth and the Moon had been equal,
this should evidently be found half way between the two bodies. But by
making allowance for the difference of the respective masses, it was
easy to calculate that this point would be situated at the 9/10 of the
total distance, or, in round numbers, at something less than 216,000
miles from the Earth.

At this point, a body that possessed no energy or principle of movement
within itself, would remain forever, relatively motionless, suspended
like Mahomet's coffin, being equally attracted by the two orbs and
nothing impelling it in one direction rather than in the other.

Now the Projectile at this moment was nearing this point; if it reached
it, what would be the consequence?

To this question three answers presented themselves, all possible under
the circumstances, but very different in their results.

1. Suppose the Projectile to possess velocity enough to pass the neutral
point. In such case, it would undoubtedly proceed onward to the Moon,
being drawn thither by Lunar attraction.

2. Suppose it lacked the requisite velocity for reaching the neutral
point. In such a case it would just as certainly fall back to the Earth,
in obedience to the law of Terrestrial attraction.

3. Suppose it to be animated by just sufficient velocity to reach the
neutral point, but not to pass it. In that case, the Projectile would
remain forever in the same spot, perfectly motionless as far as regards
the Earth and the Moon, though of course following them both in their
annual orbits round the Sun.

Such was now the state of things, which Barbican tried to explain to his
friends, who, it need hardly be said, listened to his remarks with the
most intense interest. How were they to know, they asked him, the
precise instant at which the Projectile would reach the neutral point?
That would be an easy matter, he assured them. It would be at the very
moment when both themselves and all the other objects contained in the
Projectile would be completely free from every operation of the law of
gravity; in other words, when everything would cease to have weight.

This gradual diminution of the action of gravity, the travellers had
been for some time noticing, but they had not yet witnessed its total
cessation. But that very morning, about an hour before noon, as the
Captain was making some little experiment in Chemistry, he happened by
accident to overturn a glass full of water. What was his surprise at
seeing that neither the glass nor the water fell to the floor! Both
remained suspended in the air almost completely motionless.

"The prettiest experiment I ever saw!" cried Ardan; "let us have more of
it!"

And seizing the bottles, the arms, and the other objects in the
Projectile, he arranged them around each other in the air with some
regard to symmetry and proportion. The different articles, keeping
strictly each in its own place, formed a very attractive group wonderful
to behold. Diana, placed in the apex of the pyramid, would remind you of
those marvellous suspensions in the air performed by Houdin, Herman, and
a few other first class wizards. Only being kept in her place without
being hampered by invisible strings, the animal rather seemed to enjoy
the exhibition, though in all probability she was hardly conscious of
any thing unusual in her appearance.

Our travellers had been fully prepared for such a phenomenon, yet it
struck them with as much surprise as if they had never uttered a
scientific reason to account for it. They saw that, no longer subject to
the ordinary laws of nature, they were now entering the realms of the
marvellous. They felt that their bodies were absolutely without weight.
Their arms, fully extended, no longer sought their sides. Their heads
oscillated unsteadily on their shoulders. Their feet no longer rested on
the floor. In their efforts to hold themselves straight, they looked
like drunken men trying to maintain the perpendicular. We have all read
stories of some men deprived of the power of reflecting light and of
others who could not cast a shadow. But here reality, no fantastic
story, showed you men who, through the counteraction of attractive
forces, could tell no difference between light substances and heavy
substances, and who absolutely had no weight whatever themselves!

"Let us take graceful attitudes!" cried Ardan, "and imagine we are
playing _tableaux_! Let us, for instance, form a grand historical group
of the three great goddesses of the nineteenth century. Barbican will
represent Minerva or _Science_; the Captain, Bellona or _War_; while I,
as Madre Natura, the newly born goddess of _Progress_, floating
gracefully over you both, extend my hands so, fondly patronizing the
one, but grandly ordering off the other, to the regions of eternal
night! More on your toe, Captain! Your right foot a little higher! Look
at Barbican's admirable pose! Now then, prepare to receive orders for a
new tableau! Form group _à la Jardin Mabille!_ Presto! Change!"

In an instant, our travellers, changing attitudes, formed the new group
with tolerable success. Even Barbican, who had been to Paris in his
youth, yielding for a moment to the humor of the thing, acted the _naif
Anglais_ to the life. The Captain was frisky enough to remind you of a
middle-aged Frenchman from the provinces, on a hasty visit to the
capital for a few days' fun. Ardan was in raptures.

"Oh! if Raphael could only see us!" he exclaimed in a kind of ecstasy.
"He would paint such a picture as would throw all his other masterpieces
in the shade!"

"Knock spots out of the best of them by fifty per cent!" cried the
Captain, gesticulating well enough _à l'étudiant_, but rather mixing his
metaphors.

[Illustration: A GROUP _A LA JARDIN MABILLE_.]

"He should be pretty quick in getting through the job," observed
Barbican, the first as usual to recover tranquillity. "As soon as the
Projectile will have passed the neutral point--in half an hour at
longest--lunar attraction will draw us to the Moon."

"We shall have to crawl on the ceiling then like flies," said Ardan.

"Not at all," said the Captain; "the Projectile, having its centre of
gravity very low, will turn upside down by degrees."

"Upside down!" cried Ardan. "That will be a nice mess! everything
higgledy-piggledy!"

"No danger, friend Michael," said M'Nicholl; "there shall be no disorder
whatever; nothing will quit its place; the movement of the Projectile
will be effected by such slow degrees as to be imperceptible."

"Yes," added Barbican, "as soon as we shall have passed the neutral
point, the base of the Projectile, its heaviest part, will swing around
gradually until it faces the Moon. Before this phenomenon, however, can
take place, we must of course cross the line."

"Cross the line!" cried the Frenchman; "then let us imitate the sailors
when they do the same thing in the Atlantic Ocean! Splice the main
brace!"

A slight effort carried him sailing over to the side of the Projectile.
Opening a cupboard and taking out a bottle and a few glasses, he placed
them on a tray. Then setting the tray itself in the air as on a table in
front of his companions, he filled the glasses, passed them around, and,
in a lively speech interrupted with many a joyous hurrah, congratulated
his companions on their glorious achievement in being the first that
ever crossed the lunar line.

This counteracting influence of the attractions lasted nearly an hour.
By that time the travellers could keep themselves on the floor without
much effort. Barbican also made his companions remark that the conical
point of the Projectile diverged a little from the direct line to the
Moon, while by an inverse movement, as they could notice through the
window of the floor, the base was gradually turning away from the Earth.
The Lunar attraction was evidently getting the better of the
Terrestrial. The fall towards the Moon, though still almost insensible,
was certainly beginning.

It could not be more than the eightieth part of an inch in the first
second. But by degrees, as the attractive force would increase, the fall
would be more decided, and the Projectile, overbalanced by its base, and
presenting its cone to the Earth, would descend with accelerated
velocity to the Lunar surface. The object of their daring attempt would
then be successfully attained. No further obstacle, therefore, being
likely to stand in the way of the complete success of the enterprise,
the Captain and the Frenchman cordially shook hands with Barbican, all
kept congratulating each other on their good fortune as long as the
bottle lasted.

They could not talk enough about the wonderful phenomenon lately
witnessed; the chief point, the neutralization of the law of gravity,
particularly, supplied them with an inexhaustible subject. The
Frenchman, as usual, as enthusiastic in his fancy, as he was fanciful in
his enthusiasm, got off some characteristic remarks.

"What a fine thing it would be, my boys," he exclaimed, "if on Earth we
could be so fortunate as we have been here, and get rid of that weight
that keeps us down like lead, that rivets us to it like an adamantine
chain! Then should we prisoners become free! Adieu forever to all
weariness of arms or feet! At present, in order to fly over the surface
of the Earth by the simple exertion of our muscles or even to sustain
ourselves in the air, we require a muscular force fifty times greater
than we possess; but if attraction did not exist, the simplest act of
the will, our slightest whim even, would be sufficient to transport us
to whatever part of space we wished to visit."

"Ardan, you had better invent something to kill attraction," observed
M'Nicholl drily; "you can do it if you try. Jackson and Morton have
killed pain by sulphuric ether. Suppose you try your hand on
attraction!"

"It would be worth a trial!" cried Ardan, so full of his subject as not
to notice the Captain's jeering tone; "attraction once destroyed, there
is an end forever to all loads, packs and burdens! How the poor omnibus
horses would rejoice! Adieu forever to all cranes, derricks, capstans,
jack-screws, and even hotel-elevators! We could dispense with all
ladders, door steps, and even stair-cases!"

"And with all houses too," interrupted Barbican; "or, at least, we
_should_ dispense with them because we could not have them. If there was
no weight, you could neither make a wall of bricks nor cover your house
with a roof. Even your hat would not stay on your head. The cars would
not stay on the railway nor the boats on the water. What do I say? We
could not have any water. Even the Ocean would leave its bed and float
away into space. Nay, the atmosphere itself would leave us, being
detained in its place by terrestrial attraction and by nothing else."

"Too true, Mr. President," replied Ardan after a pause. "It's a fact. I
acknowledge the corn, as Marston says. But how you positive fellows do
knock holes into our pretty little creations of fancy!"

"Don't feel so bad about it, Ardan;" observed M'Nicholl; "though there
may be no orb from which gravity is excluded altogether, we shall soon
land in one, where it is much less powerful than on the Earth."

"You mean the Moon!"

"Yes, the Moon. Her mass being 1/89 of the Earth's, her attractive power
should be in the same proportion; that is, a boy 10 years old, whose
weight on Earth is about 90 lbs., would weigh on the Moon only about 1
pound, if nothing else were to be taken into consideration. But when
standing on the surface of the Moon, he is relatively 4 times nearer to
the centre than when he is standing on the surface of the Earth. His
weight, therefore, having to be increased by the square of the distance,
must be sixteen times greater. Now 16 times 1/89 being less than 1/5, it
is clear that my weight of 150 pounds will be cut down to nearly 30 as
soon as we reach the Moon's surface."

"And mine?" asked Ardan.

"Yours will hardly reach 25 pounds, I should think," was the reply.

"Shall my muscular strength diminish in the same proportion?" was the
next question.

"On the contrary, it will be relatively so much the more increased that
you can take a stride 15 feet in width as easily as you can now take one
of ordinary length."

"We shall be all Samsons, then, in the Moon!" cried Ardan.

"Especially," replied M'Nicholl, "if the stature of the Selenites is in
proportion to the mass of their globe."

"If so, what should be their height?"

"A tall man would hardly be twelve inches in his boots!"

"They must be veritable Lilliputians then!" cried Ardan; "and we are all
to be Gullivers! The old myth of the Giants realized! Perhaps the Titans
that played such famous parts in the prehistoric period of our Earth,
were adventurers like ourselves, casually arrived from some great
planet!"

"Not from such planets as _Mercury_, _Venus_ or _Mars_ anyhow, friend
Michael," observed Barbican. "But the inhabitants of _Jupiter_,
_Saturn_, _Uranus,_ or _Neptune_, if they bear the same proportion to
their planet that we do ours, must certainly be regular Brobdignagians."

"Let us keep severely away from all planets of the latter class then,"
said Ardan. "I never liked to play the part of Lilliputian myself. But
how about the Sun, Barbican? I always had a hankering after the Sun!"

"The Sun's volume is about 1-1/3 million times greater than that of the
Earth, but his density being only about 1/4, the attraction on his
surface is hardly 30 times greater than that of our globe. Still, every
proportion observed, the inhabitants of the Sun can't be much less than
150 or 160 feet in height."

"_Mille tonnerres!_" cried Ardan, "I should be there like Ulysses among
the Cyclops! I'll tell you what it is, Barbican; if we ever decide on
going to the Sun, we must provide ourselves before hand with a few of
your Rodman's Columbiads to frighten off the Solarians!"

"Your Columbiads would not do great execution there," observed
M'Nicholl; "your bullet would be hardly out of the barrel when it would
drop to the surface like a heavy stone pushed off the wall of a house."

"Oh! I like that!" laughed the incredulous Ardan.

"A little calculation, however, shows the Captain's remark to be
perfectly just," said Barbican. "Rodman's ordinary 15 inch Columbiad
requires a charge of 100 pounds of mammoth powder to throw a ball of
500 pounds weight. What could such a charge do with a ball weighing 30
times as much or 15,000 pounds? Reflect on the enormous weight
everything must have on the surface of the Sun! Your hat, for instance,
would weigh 20 or 30 pounds. Your cigar nearly a pound. In short, your
own weight on the Sun's surface would be so great, more than two tons,
that if you ever fell you should never be able to pick yourself up
again!"

"Yes," added the Captain, "and whenever you wanted to eat or drink you
should rig up a set of powerful machinery to hoist the eatables and
drinkables into your mouth."

"Enough of the Sun to-day, boys!" cried Ardan, shrugging his shoulders;
"I don't contemplate going there at present. Let us be satisfied with
the Moon! There, at least, we shall be of some account!"




CHAPTER IX.

A LITTLE OFF THE TRACK.


Barbican's mind was now completely at rest at least on one subject. The
original force of the discharge had been great enough to send the
Projectile beyond the neutral line. Therefore, there was no longer any
danger of its falling back to the Earth. Therefore, there was no longer
any danger of its resting eternally motionless on the point of the
counteracting attractions. The next subject to engage his attention was
the question: would the Projectile, under the influence of lunar
attraction, succeed in reaching its destination?

The only way in which it _could_ succeed was by falling through a space
of nearly 24,000 miles and then striking the Moon's surface. A most
terrific fall! Even taking the lunar attraction to be only the one-sixth
of the Earth's, such a fall was simply bewildering to think of. The
greatest height to which a balloon ever ascended was seven miles
(Glaisher, 1862). Imagine a fall from even that distance! Then imagine a
fall from a height of four thousand miles!

Yet it was for a fall of this appalling kind on the surface of the Moon
that the travellers had now to prepare themselves. Instead of avoiding
it, however, they eagerly desired it and would be very much
disappointed if they missed it. They had taken the best precautions they
could devise to guard against the terrific shock. These were mainly of
two kinds: one was intended to counteract as much as possible the
fearful results to be expected the instant the Projectile touched the
lunar surface; the other, to retard the velocity of the fall itself, and
thereby to render it less violent.

The best arrangement of the first kind was certainly Barbican's
water-contrivance for counteracting the shock at starting, which has
been so fully described in our former volume. (See _Baltimore Gun Club_,
page 353.) But unfortunately it could be no longer employed. Even if the
partitions were in working order, the water--two thousand pounds in
weight had been required--was no longer to be had. The little still left
in the tanks was of no account for such a purpose. Besides, they had not
a single drop of the precious liquid to spare, for they were as yet
anything but sanguine regarding the facility of finding water on the
Moon's surface.

Fortunately, however, as the gentle reader may remember, Barbican,
besides using water to break the concussion, had provided the movable
disc with stout pillars containing a strong buffing apparatus, intended
to protect it from striking the bottom too violently after the
destruction of the different partitions. These buffers were still good,
and, gravity being as yet almost imperceptible, to put them once more in
order and adjust them to the disc was not a difficult task.

The travellers set to work at once and soon accomplished it. The
different pieces were put together readily--a mere matter of bolts and
screws, with plenty of tools to manage them. In a short time the
repaired disc rested on its steel buffers, like a table on its legs, or
rather like a sofa seat on its springs. The new arrangement was attended
with at least one disadvantage. The bottom light being covered up, a
convenient view of the Moon's surface could not be had as soon as they
should begin to fall in a perpendicular descent. This, however, was only
a slight matter, as the side lights would permit the adventurers to
enjoy quite as favorable a view of the vast regions of the Moon as is
afforded to balloon travellers when looking down on the Earth over the
sides of their car.

The disc arrangement was completed in about an hour, but it was not till
past twelve o'clock before things were restored to their usual order.
Barbican then tried to make fresh observations regarding the inclination
of the Projectile; but to his very decided chagrin he found that it had
not yet turned over sufficiently to commence the perpendicular fall: on
the contrary, it even seemed to be following a curve rather parallel
with that of the lunar disc. The Queen of the Stars now glittered with a
light more dazzling than ever, whilst from an opposite part of the sky
the glorious King of Day flooded her with his fires.

The situation began to look a little serious.

"Shall we ever get there!" asked the Captain.

"Let us be prepared for getting there, any how," was Barbican's dubious
reply.

"You're a pretty pair of suspenders," said Ardan cheerily (he meant of
course doubting hesitators, but his fluent command of English sometimes
led him into such solecisms). "Certainly we shall get there--and perhaps
a little sooner than will be good for us."

This reply sharply recalled Barbican to the task he had undertaken, and
he now went to work seriously, trying to combine arrangements to break
the fall. The reader may perhaps remember Ardan's reply to the Captain
on the day of the famous meeting in Tampa.

"Your fall would be violent enough," the Captain had urged, "to splinter
you like glass into a thousand fragments."

"And what shall prevent me," had been Ardan's ready reply, "from
breaking my fall by means of counteracting rockets suitably disposed,
and let off at the proper time?"

The practical utility of this idea had at once impressed Barbican. It
could hardly be doubted that powerful rockets, fastened on the outside
to the bottom of the Projectile, could, when discharged, considerably
retard the velocity of the fall by their sturdy recoil. They could burn
in a vacuum by means of oxygen furnished by themselves, as powder burns
in the chamber of a gun, or as the volcanoes of the Moon continue their
action regardless of the absence of a lunar atmosphere.

Barbican had therefore provided himself with rockets enclosed in strong
steel gun barrels, grooved on the outside so that they could be screwed
into corresponding holes already made with much care in the bottom of
the Projectile. They were just long enough, when flush with the floor
inside, to project outside by about six inches. They were twenty in
number, and formed two concentric circles around the dead light. Small
holes in the disc gave admission to the wires by which each of the
rockets was to be discharged externally by electricity. The whole effect
was therefore to be confined to the outside. The mixtures having been
already carefully deposited in each barrel, nothing further need be done
than to take away the metallic plugs which had been screwed into the
bottom of the Projectile, and replace them by the rockets, every one of
which was found to fit its grooved chamber with rigid exactness.

This evidently should have been all done before the disc had been
finally laid on its springs. But as this had to be lifted up again in
order to reach the bottom of the Projectile, more work was to be done
than was strictly necessary. Though the labor was not very hard,
considering that gravity had as yet scarcely made itself felt, M'Nicholl
and Ardan were not sorry to have their little joke at Barbican's
expense. The Frenchman began humming

    "_Aliquandoque bonus dormitat Homerus,_"

to a tune from _Orphée aux Enfers_, and the Captain said something
about the Philadelphia Highway Commissioners who pave a street one day,
and tear it up the next to lay the gas pipes. But his friends' humor was
all lost on Barbican, who was so wrapped up in his work that he probably
never heard a word they said.

Towards three o'clock every preparation was made, every possible
precaution taken, and now our bold adventurers had nothing more to do
than watch and wait.

The Projectile was certainly approaching the Moon. It had by this time
turned over considerably under the influence of attraction, but its own
original motion still followed a decidedly oblique direction. The
consequence of these two forces might possibly be a tangent, line
approaching the edge of the Moon's disc. One thing was certain: the
Projectile had not yet commenced to fall directly towards her surface;
its base, in which its centre of gravity lay, was still turned away
considerably from the perpendicular.

Barbican's countenance soon showed perplexity and even alarm. His
Projectile was proving intractable to the laws of gravitation. The
_unknown_ was opening out dimly before him, the great boundless unknown
of the starry plains. In his pride and confidence as a scientist, he had
flattered himself with having sounded the consequence of every possible
hypothesis regarding the Projectile's ultimate fate: the return to the
Earth; the arrival at the Moon; and the motionless dead stop at the
neutral point. But here, a new and incomprehensible fourth hypothesis,
big with the terrors of the mystic infinite, rose up before his
disturbed mind, like a grim and hollow ghost. After a few seconds,
however, he looked at it straight in the face without wincing. His
companions showed themselves just as firm. Whether it was science that
emboldened Barbican, his phlegmatic stoicism that propped up the
Captain, or his enthusiastic vivacity that cheered the irrepressible
Ardan, I cannot exactly say. But certainly they were all soon talking
over the matter as calmly as you or I would discuss the advisability of
taking a sail on the lake some beautiful evening in July.

Their first remarks were decidedly peculiar and quite characteristic.
Other men would have asked themselves where the Projectile was taking
them to. Do you think such a question ever occurred to them? Not a bit
of it. They simply began asking each other what could have been the
cause of this new and strange state of things.

"Off the track, it appears," observed Ardan. "How's that?"

"My opinion is," answered the Captain, "that the Projectile was not
aimed true. Every possible precaution had been taken, I am well aware,
but we all know that an inch, a line, even the tenth part of a hair's
breadth wrong at the start would have sent us thousands of miles off our
course by this time."

"What have you to say to that, Barbican?" asked Ardan.

"I don't think there was any error at the start," was the confident
reply; "not even so much as a line! We took too many tests proving the
absolute perpendicularity of the Columbiad, to entertain the slightest
doubt on that subject. Its direction towards the zenith being
incontestable, I don't see why we should not reach the Moon when she
comes to the zenith."

"Perhaps we're behind time," suggested Ardan.

"What have you to say to that, Barbican?" asked the Captain. "You know
the Cambridge men said the journey had to be done in 97 hours 13 minutes
and 20 seconds. That's as much as to say that if we're not up to time we
shall miss the Moon."

"Correct," said Barbican. "But we _can't_ be behind time. We started,
you know, on December 1st, at 13 minutes and 20 seconds before 11
o'clock, and we were to arrive four days later at midnight precisely.
To-day is December 5th Gentlemen, please examine your watches. It is now
half past three in the afternoon. Eight hours and a half are sufficient
to take us to our journey's end. Why should we not arrive there?"

"How about being ahead of time?" asked the Captain.

"Just so!" said Ardan. "You know we have discovered the initial velocity
to have been greater than was expected."

"Not at all! not at all!" cried Barbican "A slight excess of velocity
would have done no harm whatever had the direction of the Projectile
been perfectly true. No. There must have been a digression. We must have
been switched off!"

"Switched off? By what?" asked both his listeners in one breath.

"I can't tell," said Barbican curtly.

"Well!" said Ardan; "if Barbican can't tell, there is an end to all
further talk on the subject. We're switched off--that's enough for me.
What has done it? I don't care. Where are we going to? I don't care.
What is the use of pestering our brains about it? We shall soon find
out. We are floating around in space, and we shall end by hauling up
somewhere or other."

But in this indifference Barbican was far from participating. Not that
he was not prepared to meet the future with a bold and manly heart. It
was his inability to answer his own question that rendered him uneasy.
What _had_ switched them off? He would have given worlds for an answer,
but his brain sorely puzzled sought one in vain.

In the mean time, the Projectile continued to turn its side rather than
its base towards the Moon; that is, to assume a lateral rather than a
direct movement, and this movement was fully participated in by the
multitude of the objects that had been thrown outside. Barbican could
even convince himself by sighting several points on the lunar surface,
by this time hardly more than fifteen or eighteen thousand miles
distant, that the velocity of the Projectile instead of accelerating was
becoming more and more uniform. This was another proof that there was
no perpendicular fall. However, though the original impulsive force was
still superior to the Moon's attraction, the travellers were evidently
approaching the lunar disc, and there was every reason to hope that they
would at last reach a point where, the lunar attraction at last having
the best of it, a decided fall should be the result.

The three friends, it need hardly be said, continued to make their
observations with redoubled interest, if redoubled interest were
possible. But with all their care they could as yet determine nothing
regarding the topographical details of our radiant satellite. Her
surface still reflected the solar rays too dazzlingly to show the relief
necessary for satisfactory observation.

Our travellers kept steadily on the watch looking out of the side
lights, till eight o'clock in the evening, by which time the Moon had
grown so large in their eyes that she covered up fully half the sky. At
this time the Projectile itself must have looked like a streak of light,
reflecting, as it did, the Sun's brilliancy on the one side and the
Moon's splendor on the other.

Barbican now took a careful observation and calculated that they could
not be much more than 2,000 miles from the object of their journey. The
velocity of the Projectile he calculated to be about 650 feet per second
or 450 miles an hour. They had therefore still plenty of time to reach
the Moon in about four hours. But though the bottom of the Projectile
continued to turn towards the lunar surface in obedience to the law of
centripetal force, the centrifugal force was still evidently strong
enough to change the path which it followed into some kind of curve, the
exact nature of which would be exceedingly difficult to calculate.

The careful observations that Barbican continued to take did not however
prevent him from endeavoring to solve his difficult problem. What _had_
switched them off? The hours passed on, but brought no result. That the
adventurers were approaching the Moon was evident, but it was just as
evident that they should never reach her. The nearest point the
Projectile could ever possibly attain would only be the result of two
opposite forces, the attractive and the repulsive, which, as was now
clear, influenced its motion. Therefore, to land in the Moon was an
utter impossibility, and any such idea was to be given up at once and
for ever.

"_Quand même_! What of it!" cried Ardan; after some moments' silence.
"We're not to land in the Moon! Well! let us do the next best
thing--pass close enough to discover her secrets!"

But M'Nicholl could not accept the situation so coolly. On the contrary,
he decidedly lost his temper, as is occasionally the case with even
phlegmatic men. He muttered an oath or two, but in a voice hardly loud
enough to reach Barbican's ear. At last, impatient of further restraint,
he burst out:

"Who the deuce cares for her secrets? To the hangman with her secrets!
We started to land in the Moon! That's what's got to be done! That I
want or nothing! Confound the darned thing, I say, whatever it was,
whether on the Earth or off it, that shoved us off the track!"

"On the Earth or off it!" cried Barbican, striking his head suddenly;
"now I see it! You're right, Captain! Confound the bolide that we met
the first night of our journey!"

"Hey?" cried Ardan.

"What do you mean?" asked M'Nicholl.

"I mean," replied Barbican, with a voice now perfectly calm, and in a
tone of quiet conviction, "that our deviation is due altogether to that
wandering meteor."

"Why, it did not even graze us!" cried Ardan.

"No matter for that," replied Barbican. "Its mass, compared to ours, was
enormous, and its attraction was undoubtedly sufficiently great to
influence our deviation."

"Hardly enough to be appreciable," urged M'Nicholl.

"Right again, Captain," observed Barbican. "But just remember an
observation of your own made this very afternoon: an inch, a line, even
the tenth part of a hair's breadth wrong at the beginning, in a journey
of 240 thousand miles, would be sufficient to make us miss the Moon!"




CHAPTER X.

THE OBSERVERS OF THE MOON.


Barbican's happy conjecture had probably hit the nail on the head. The
divergency even of a second may amount to millions of miles if you only
have your lines long enough. The Projectile had certainly gone off its
direct course; whatever the cause, the fact was undoubted. It was a
great pity. The daring attempt must end in a failure due altogether to a
fortuitous accident, against which no human foresight could have
possibly taken precaution. Unless in case of the occurrence of some
other most improbable accident, reaching the Moon was evidently now
impossible. To failure, therefore, our travellers had to make up their
minds.

But was nothing to be gained by the trip? Though missing actual contact
with the Moon, might they not pass near enough to solve several problems
in physics and geology over which scientists had been for a long time
puzzling their brains in vain? Even this would be some compensation for
all their trouble, courage, and intelligence. As to what was to be their
own fate, to what doom were themselves to be reserved--they never
appeared to think of such a thing. They knew very well that in the midst
of those infinite solitudes they should soon find themselves without
air. The slight supply that kept them from smothering could not
possibly last more than five or six days longer. Five or six days! What
of that? _Quand même_! as Ardan often exclaimed. Five or six days were
centuries to our bold adventurers! At present every second was a year in
events, and infinitely too precious to be squandered away in mere
preparations for possible contingencies. The Moon could never be
reached, but was it not possible that her surface could be carefully
observed? This they set themselves at once to find out.

The distance now separating them from our Satellite they estimated at
about 400 miles. Therefore relatively to their power of discovering the
details of her disc, they were still farther off from the Moon than some
of our modern astronomers are to-day, when provided with their powerful
telescopes.

We know, for example, that Lord Rosse's great telescope at Parsonstown,
possessing a power of magnifying 6000 times, brings the Moon to within
40 miles of us; not to speak of Barbican's great telescope on the summit
of Long's Peak, by which the Moon, magnified 48,000 times, was brought
within 5 miles of the Earth, where it therefore could reveal with
sufficient distinctness every object above 40 feet in diameter.

Therefore our adventurers, though at such a comparatively small
distance, could not make out the topographical details of the Moon with
any satisfaction by their unaided vision. The eye indeed could easily
enough catch the rugged outline of these vast depressions improperly
called "Seas," but it could do very little more. Its powers of
adjustability seemed to fail before the strange and bewildering scene.
The prominence of the mountains vanished, not only through the
foreshortening, but also in the dazzling radiation produced by the
direct reflection of the solar rays. After a short time therefore,
completely foiled by the blinding glare, the eye turned itself
unwillingly away, as if from a furnace of molten silver.

The spherical surface, however, had long since begun to reveal its
convexity. The Moon was gradually assuming the appearance of a gigantic
egg with the smaller end turned towards the Earth. In the earlier days
of her formation, while still in a state of mobility, she had been
probably a perfect sphere in shape, but, under the influence of
terrestrial gravity operating for uncounted ages, she was drawn at last
so much towards the centre of attraction as to resemble somewhat a
prolate spheriod. By becoming a satellite, she had lost the native
perfect regularity of her outline; her centre of gravity had shifted
from her real centre; and as a result of this arrangement, some
scientists have drawn the conclusion that the Moon's air and water have
been attracted to that portion of her surface which is always invisible
to the inhabitants of the Earth.

The convexity of her outline, this bulging prominence of her surface,
however, did not last long. The travellers were getting too near to
notice it. They were beginning to survey the Moon as balloonists survey
the Earth. The Projectile was now moving with great rapidity--with
nothing like its initial velocity, but still eight or nine times faster
than an express train. Its line of movement, however, being oblique
instead of direct, was so deceptive as to induce Ardan to flatter
himself that they might still reach the lunar surface. He could never
persuade himself to believe that they should get so near their aim and
still miss it. No; nothing might, could, would or should induce him to
believe it, he repeated again and again. But Barbican's pitiless logic
left him no reply.

"No, dear friend, no. We can reach the Moon only by a fall, and we don't
fall. Centripetal force keeps us at least for a while under the lunar
influence, but centrifugal force drives us away irresistibly."

These words were uttered in a tone that killed Ardan's last and fondest
hope.

       *       *       *       *       *

The portion of the Moon they were now approaching was her northern
hemisphere, found usually in the lower part of lunar maps. The lens of a
telescope, as is well known, gives only the inverted image of the
object; therefore, when an upright image is required, an additional
glass must be used. But as every additional glass is an additional
obstruction to the light, the object glass of a Lunar telescope is
employed without a corrector; light is thereby saved, and in viewing the
Moon, as in viewing a map, it evidently makes very little difference
whether we see her inverted or not. Maps of the Moon therefore, being
drawn from the image formed by the telescope, show the north in the
lower part, and _vice versa_. Of this kind was the _Mappa
Selenographica_, by Beer and Maedler, so often previously alluded to and
now carefully consulted by Barbican. The northern hemisphere, towards
which they were now rapidly approaching, presented a strong contrast
with the southern, by its vast plains and great depressions, checkered
here and there by very remarkable isolated mountains.[A]

At midnight the Moon was full. This was the precise moment at which the
travellers would have landed had not that unlucky bolide drawn them off
the track. The Moon was therefore strictly up to time, arriving at the
instant rigidly determined by the Cambridge Observatory. She occupied
the exact point, to a mathematical nicety, where our 28th parallel
crossed the perigee. An observer posted in the bottom of the Columbiad
at Stony Hill, would have found himself at this moment precisely under
the Moon. The axis of the enormous gun, continued upwards vertically,
would have struck the orb of night exactly in her centre.

It is hardly necessary to tell our readers that, during this memorable
night of the 5th and 6th of December, the travellers had no desire to
close their eyes. Could they do so, even if they had desired? No! All
their faculties, thoughts, and desires, were concentrated in one single
word: "Look!" Representatives of the Earth, and of all humanity past and
present, they felt that it was with their eyes that the race of man
contemplated the lunar regions and penetrated the secrets of our
satellite! A certain indescribable emotion therefore, combined with an
undefined sense of responsibility, held possession of their hearts, as
they moved silently from window to window.

Their observations, recorded by Barbican, were vigorously remade,
revised, and re-determined, by the others. To make them, they had
telescopes which they now began to employ with great advantage. To
regulate and investigate them, they had the best maps of the day.

Whilst occupied in this silent work, they could not help throwing a
short retrospective glance on the former Observers of the Moon.

The first of these was Galileo. His slight telescope magnified only
thirty times, still, in the spots flecking the lunar surface, like the
eyes checkering a peacock's tail, he was the first to discover mountains
and even to measure their heights. These, considering the difficulties
under which he labored, were wonderfully accurate, but unfortunately he
made no map embodying his observations.

A few years afterwards, Hevel of Dantzic, (1611-1688) a Polish
astronomer--more generally known as Hevelius, his works being all
written in Latin--undertook to correct Galileo's measurements. But as
his method could be strictly accurate only twice a month--the periods of
the first and second quadratures--his rectifications could be hardly
called successful.

Still it is to the labors of this eminent astronomer, carried on
uninterruptedly for fifty years in his own observatory, that we owe the
first map of the Moon. It was published in 1647 under the name of
_Selenographia_. He represented the circular mountains by open spots
somewhat round in shape, and by shaded figures he indicated the vast
plains, or, as he called them, the _seas_, that occupied so much of her
surface. These he designated by names taken from our Earth. His map
shows you a _Mount Sinai_ the midst of an _Arabia_, an _Ætna_ in the
centre of a _Sicily_, _Alps_, _Apennines_, _Carpathians_, a
_Mediterranean_, a _Palus Mæolis_, a _Pontus Euxinus_, and a _Caspian
Sea_. But these names seem to have been given capriciously and at
random, for they never recall any resemblance existing between
themselves and their namesakes on our globe. In the wide open spot, for
instance, connected on the south with vast continents and terminating in
a point, it would be no easy matter to recognize the reversed image of
the _Indian Peninsula_, the _Bay of Bengal_, and _Cochin China_.
Naturally, therefore, these names were nearly all soon dropped; but
another system of nomenclature, proposed by an astronomer better
acquainted with the human heart, met with a success that has lasted to
the present day.

This was Father Riccioli, a Jesuit, and (1598-1671) a contemporary of
Hevelius. In his _Astronomia Reformata_, (1665), he published a rough
and incorrect map of the Moon, compiled from observations made by
Grimaldi of Ferrara; but in designating the mountains, he named them
after eminent astronomers, and this idea of his has been carefully
carried out by map makers of later times.

A third map of the Moon was published at Rome in 1666 by Dominico
Cassini of Nice (1625-1712), the famous discoverer of Saturn's
satellites. Though somewhat incorrect regarding measurements, it was
superior to Riccioli's in execution, and for a long time it was
considered a standard work. Copies of this map are still to be found,
but Cassini's original copper-plate, preserved for a long time at the
_Imprimerie Royale_ in Paris, was at last sold to a brazier, by no less
a personage than the Director of the establishment himself, who,
according to Arago, wanted to get rid of what he considered useless
lumber!

La Hire (1640-1718), professor of astronomy in the _Collège de France_,
and an accomplished draughtsman, drew a map of the Moon which was
thirteen feet in diameter. This map could be seen long afterwards in the
library of St. Genevieve, Paris, but it was never engraved.

About 1760, Mayer, a famous German astronomer and the director of the
observatory of Göttingen, began the publication of a magnificent map of
the Moon, drawn after lunar measurements all rigorously verified by
himself. Unfortunately his death in 1762 interrupted a work which would
have surpassed in accuracy every previous effort of the kind.

Next appears Schroeter of Erfurt (1745-1816), a fine observer (he first
discovered the Lunar _Rills_), but a poor draughtsman: his maps are
therefore of little value. Lohrman of Dresden published in 1838 an
excellent map of the Moon, 15 inches in diameter, accompanied by
descriptive text and several charts of particular portions on a larger
scale.

But this and all other maps were thrown completely into the shade by
Beer and Maedler's famous _Mappa Selenographica_, so often alluded to in
the course of this work. This map, projected orthographically--that is,
one in which all the rays proceeding from the surface to the eye are
supposed to be parallel to each other--gives a reproduction of the lunar
disc exactly as it appears. The representation of the mountains and
plains is therefore correct only in the central portion; elsewhere,
north, south, east, or west, the features, being foreshortened, are
crowded together, and cannot be compared in measurement with those in
the centre. It is more than three feet square; for convenient reference
it is divided into four parts, each having a very full index; in short,
this map is in all respects a master piece of lunar cartography.[B]

After Beer and Maedler, we should allude to Julius Schmitt's (of Athens)
excellent selenographic reliefs: to Doctor Draper's, and to Father
Secchi's successful application of photography to lunar representation;
to De La Rue's (of London) magnificent stereographs of the Moon, to be
had at every optician's; to the clear and correct map prepared by
Lecouturier and Chapuis in 1860; to the many beautiful pictures of the
Moon in various phases of illumination obtained by the Messrs. Bond of
Harvard University; to Rutherford's (of New York) unparalleled lunar
photographs; and finally to Nasmyth and Carpenter's wonderful work on
the Moon, illustrated by photographs of her surface in detail, prepared
from models at which they had been laboring for more than a quarter of
the century.

Of all these maps, pictures, and projections, Barbican had provided
himself with only two--Beer and Maedler's in German, and Lecouturier and
Chapuis' in French. These he considered quite sufficient for all
purposes, and certainly they considerably simplified his labors as an
observer.

His best optical instruments were several excellent marine telescopes,
manufactured especially under his direction. Magnifying the object a
hundred times, on the surface of the Earth they would have brought the
Moon to within a distance of somewhat less than 2400 miles. But at the
point to which our travellers had arrived towards three o'clock in the
morning, and which could hardly be more than 12 or 1300 miles from the
Moon, these telescopes, ranging through a medium disturbed by no
atmosphere, easily brought the lunar surface to within less than 13
miles' distance from the eyes of our adventurers.

Therefore they should now see objects in the Moon as clearly as people
can see the opposite bank of a river that is about 12 miles wide.

[Footnote A: In our Map of the Moon, prepared expressly for this work,
we have so far improved on Beer and Maedler as to give her surface as it
appears to the naked eye: that is, the north is in the north; only we
must always remember that the west is and must be on the _right hand_.]

[Footnote B: In our Map the _Mappa Selenographica_ is copied as closely
and as fully as is necessary for understanding the details of the story.
For further information the reader is referred to Nasmyth's late
magnificent work: the MOON.]




CHAPTER XI.

FACT AND FANCY.


"Have you ever seen the Moon?" said a teacher ironically one day in
class to one of his pupils.

"No, sir;" was the pert reply; "but I think I can safely say I've heard
it spoken about."

Though saying what he considered a smart thing, the pupil was probably
perfectly right. Like the immense majority of his fellow beings, he had
looked at the Moon, heard her talked of, written poetry about her, but,
in the strict sense of the term, he had probably never seen her--that
is--scanned her, examined her, surveyed her, inspected her, reconnoitred
her--even with an opera glass! Not one in a thousand, not one in ten
thousand, has ever examined even the map of our only Satellite. To guard
our beloved and intelligent reader against this reproach, we have
prepared an excellent reduction of Beer and Maedler's _Mappa_, on which,
for the better understanding of what is to follow, we hope he will
occasionally cast a gracious eye.

When you look at any map of the Moon, you are struck first of all with
one peculiarity. Contrary to the arrangement prevailing in Mars and on
our Earth, the continents occupy principally the southern hemisphere of
the lunar orb. Then these continents are far from presenting such sharp
and regular outlines as distinguish the Indian Peninsula, Africa, and
South America. On the contrary, their coasts, angular, jagged, and
deeply indented, abound in bays and peninsulas. They remind you of the
coast of Norway, or of the islands in the Sound, where the land seems to
be cut up into endless divisions. If navigation ever existed on the
Moon's surface, it must have been of a singularly difficult and
dangerous nature, and we can scarcely say which of the two should be
more pitied--the sailors who had to steer through these dangerous and
complicated passes, or the map-makers who had to designate them on their
charts.

You will also remark that the southern pole of the Moon is much more
_continental_ than the northern. Around the latter, there exists only a
slight fringe of lands separated from the other continents by vast
"seas." This word "seas"--a term employed by the first lunar map
constructors--is still retained to designate those vast depressions on
the Moon's surface, once perhaps covered with water, though they are now
only enormous plains. In the south, the continents cover nearly the
whole hemisphere. It is therefore possible that the Selenites have
planted their flag on at least one of their poles, whereas the Parrys
and Franklins of England, the Kanes and the Wilkeses of America, the
Dumont d'Urvilles and the Lamberts of France, have so far met with
obstacles completely insurmountable, while in search of those unknown
points of our terrestrial globe.

The islands--the next feature on the Moon's surface--are exceedingly
numerous. Generally oblong or circular in shape and almost as regular in
outline as if drawn with a compass, they form vast archipelagoes like
the famous group lying between Greece and Asia Minor, which mythology
has made the scene of her earliest and most charming legends. As we gaze
at them, the names of Naxos, Tenedos, Milo, and Carpathos rise up before
our mind's eye, and we begin looking around for the Trojan fleet and
Jason's Argo. This, at least, was Ardan's idea, and at first his eyes
would see nothing on the map but a Grecian archipelago. But his
companions, sound practical men, and therefore totally devoid of
sentiment, were reminded by these rugged coasts of the beetling cliffs
of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia; so that, where the Frenchman saw the
tracks of ancient heroes, the Americans saw only commodious shipping
points and favorable sites for trading posts--all, of course, in the
purest interest of lunar commerce and industry.

To end our hasty sketch of the continental portion of the Moon, we must
say a few words regarding her orthography or mountain systems. With a
fair telescope you can distinguish very readily her mountain chains, her
isolated mountains, her circuses or ring formations, and her rills,
cracks and radiating streaks. The character of the whole lunar relief is
comprised in these divisions. It is a surface prodigiously reticulated,
upheaved and depressed, apparently without the slightest order or
system. It is a vast Switzerland, an enormous Norway, where everything
is the result of direct plutonic action. This surface, so rugged, craggy
and wrinkled, seems to be the result of successive contractions of the
crust, at an early period of the planet's existence. The examination of
the lunar disc is therefore highly favorable for the study of the great
geological phenomena of our own globe. As certain astronomers have
remarked, the Moon's surface, though older than the Earth's, has
remained younger. That is, it has undergone less change. No water has
broken through its rugged elevations, filled up its scowling cavities,
and by incessant action tended continuously to the production of a
general level. No atmosphere, by its disintegrating, decomposing
influence has softened off the rugged features of the plutonic
mountains. Volcanic action alone, unaffected by either aqueous or
atmospheric forces, can here be seen in all its glory. In other words
the Moon looks now as our Earth did endless ages ago, when "she was void
and empty and when darkness sat upon the face of the deep;" eons of ages
ago, long before the tides of the ocean and the winds of the atmosphere
had begun to strew her rough surface with sand and clay, rock and coal,
forest and meadow, gradually preparing it, according to the laws of our
beneficent Creator, to be at last the pleasant though the temporary
abode of Man!

Having wandered over vast continents, your eye is attracted by the
"seas" of dimensions still vaster. Not only their shape, situation, and
look, remind us of our own oceans, but, again like them, they occupy
the greater part of the Moon's surface. The "seas," or, more correctly,
plains, excited our travellers' curiosity to a very high degree, and
they set themselves at once to examine their nature.

The astronomer who first gave names to those "seas" in all probability
was a Frenchman. Hevelius, however, respected them, even Riccioli did
not disturb them, and so they have come down to us. Ardan laughed
heartily at the fancies which they called up, and said the whole thing
reminded him of one of those "maps of matrimony" that he had once seen
or read of in the works of Scudéry or Cyrano de Bergerac.

"However," he added, "I must say that this map has much more reality in
it than could be found in the sentimental maps of the 17th century. In
fact, I have no difficulty whatever in calling it the _Map of Life!_
very neatly divided into two parts, the east and the west, the masculine
and the feminine. The women on the right, and the men on the left!"

At such observations, Ardan's companions only shrugged their shoulders.
A map of the Moon in their eyes was a map of the Moon, no more, no less;
their romantic friend might view it as he pleased. Nevertheless, their
romantic friend was not altogether wrong. Judge a little for yourselves.

What is the first "sea" you find in the hemisphere on the left? The
_Mare Imbrium_ or the Rainy Sea, a fit emblem of our human life, beaten
by many a pitiless storm. In a corresponding part of the southern
hemisphere you see _Mare Nubium_, the Cloudy Sea, in which our poor
human reason so often gets befogged. Close to this lies _Mare Humorum_,
the Sea of Humors, where we sail about, the sport of each fitful breeze,
"everything by starts and nothing long." Around all, embracing all, lies
_Oceanus Procellarum_, the Ocean of Tempests, where, engaged in one
continuous struggle with the gusty whirlwinds, excited by our own
passions or those of others, so few of us escape shipwreck. And, when
disgusted by the difficulties of life, its deceptions, its treacheries
and all the other miseries "that flesh is heir to," where do we too
often fly to avoid them? To the _Sinus Iridium_ or the _Sinus Roris_,
that is Rainbow Gulf and Dewy Gulf whose glittering lights, alas! give
forth no real illumination to guide our stumbling feet, whose sun-tipped
pinnacles have less substance than a dream, whose enchanting waters all
evaporate before we can lift a cup-full to our parched lips! Showers,
storms, fogs, rainbows--is not the whole mortal life of man comprised in
these four words?

Now turn to the hemisphere on the right, the women's side, and you also
discover "seas," more numerous indeed, but of smaller dimensions and
with gentler names, as more befitting the feminine temperament. First
comes _Mare Serenitatis_, the Sea of Serenity, so expressive of the
calm, tranquil soul of an innocent maiden. Near it is _Lacus Somniorum_,
the Lake of Dreams, in which she loves to gaze at her gilded and rosy
future. In the southern division is seen _Mare Nectaris_, the Sea of
Nectar, over whose soft heaving billows she is gently wafted by Love's
caressing winds, "Youth on the prow and Pleasure at the helm." Not far
off is _Mare Fecunditatis_, the Sea of Fertility, in which she becomes
the happy mother of rejoicing children. A little north is _Mare
Crisium_, the Sea of Crises where her life and happiness are sometimes
exposed to sudden, and unexpected dangers which fortunately, however,
seldom end fatally. Far to the left, near the men's side, is _Mare
Vaporum_, the Sea of Vapors, into which, though it is rather small, and
full of sunken rocks, she sometimes allows herself to wander, moody, and
pouting, and not exactly knowing where she wants to go or what she wants
to do. Between the two last expands the great _Mare Tranquillitatis_,
the Sea of Tranquillity, into whose quiet depths are at last absorbed
all her simulated passions, all her futile aspirations, all her
unglutted desires, and whose unruffled waters are gliding on forever in
noiseless current towards _Lacus Mortis_, the Lake of Death, whose misty
shores

    "In ruthless, vast, and gloomy woods are girt."

So at least Ardan mused as he stooped over Beer and Maedler's map. Did
not these strange successive names somewhat justify his flights of
fancy? Surely they had a wonderful variety of meaning. Was it by
accident or by forethought deep that the two hemispheres of the Moon had
been thus so strangely divided, yet, as man to woman, though divided
still united, and thus forming even in the cold regions of space a
perfect image of our terrestrial existence? Who can say that our
romantic French friend was altogether wrong in thus explaining the
astute fancies of the old astronomers?

His companions, however, it need hardly be said, never saw the "seas" in
that light. They looked on them not with sentimental but with
geographical eyes. They studied this new world and tried to get it by
heart, working at it like a school boy at his lessons. They began by
measuring its angles and diameters.

To their practical, common sense vision _Mare Nubium_, the Cloudy Sea,
was an immense depression of the surface, sprinkled here and there with
a few circular mountains. Covering a great portion of that part of the
southern hemisphere which lies east of the centre, it occupied a space
of about 270 thousand square miles, its central point lying in 15° south
latitude and 20° east longitude. Northeast from this lay _Oceanus
Procellarum_, the Ocean of Tempests, the most extensive of all the
plains on the lunar disc, embracing a surface of about half a million of
square miles, its centre being in 10° north and 45° east. From its bosom
those wonderful mountains _Kepler_ and _Aristarchus_ lifted their vast
ramparts glittering with innumerable streaks radiating in all
directions.

To the north, in the direction of _Mare Frigoris_, extends _Mare
Imbrium_, the Sea of Rains, its central point in 35° north and 20°
east. It is somewhat circular in shape, and it covers a space of about
300 thousand square miles. South of _Oceanus Procellarum_ and separated
from _Mare Nubium_ by a goodly number of ring mountains, lies the little
basin of _Mare Humorum_, the Sea of Humors, containing only about 66
thousand square miles, its central point having a latitude of 25° south
and a longitude of 40° east.

On the shores of these great seas three "Gulfs" are easily found: _Sinus
Aestuum_, the Gulf of the Tides, northeast of the centre; _Sinus
Iridium_, the Gulf of the Rainbows, northeast of the _Mare Imbrium_; and
_Sinus Roris_, the Dewy Gulf, a little further northeast. All seem to be
small plains enclosed between chains of lofty mountains.

The western hemisphere, dedicated to the ladies, according to Ardan, and
therefore naturally more capricious, was remarkable for "seas" of
smaller dimensions, but much more numerous. These were principally:
_Mare Serenitatis_, the Sea of Serenity, 25° north and 20° west,
comprising a surface of about 130 thousand square miles; _Mare Crisium_,
the Sea of Crises, a round, well defined, dark depression towards the
northwestern edge, 17° north 55° west, embracing a surface of 60
thousand square miles, a regular Caspian Sea in fact, only that the
plateau in which it lies buried is surrounded by a girdle of much higher
mountains. Then towards the equator, with a latitude of 5° north and a
longitude of 25° west, appears _Mare Tranquillitatis_, the Sea of
Tranquillity, occupying about 180 thousand square miles. This
communicates on the south with _Mare Nectaris_, the Sea of Nectar,
embracing an extent of about 42 thousand square miles, with a mean
latitude of 15° south and a longitude of 35° west. Southwest from _Mare
Tranquillitatis_, lies _Mare Fecunditatis_, the Sea of Fertility, the
greatest in this hemisphere, as it occupies an extent of more than 300
thousand square miles, its latitude being 3° south and its longitude 50°
west. For away to the north, on the borders of the _Mare Frigoris_, or
Icy Sea, is seen the small _Mare Humboldtianum_, or Humboldt Sea, with a
surface of about 10 thousand square miles. Corresponding to this in the
southern hemisphere lies the _Mare Australe_, or South Sea, whose
surface, as it extends along the western rim, is rather difficult to
calculate. Finally, right in the centre of the lunar disc, where the
equator intersects the first meridian, can be seen _Sinus Medii_, the
Central Gulf, the common property therefore of all the hemispheres, the
northern and southern, as well as of the eastern and western.

Into these great divisions the surface of our satellite resolved itself
before the eyes of Barbican and M'Nicholl. Adding up the various
measurements, they found that the surface of her visible hemisphere was
about 7-1/2 millions of square miles, of which about the two thirds
comprised the volcanoes, the mountain chains, the rings, the islands--in
short, the land portion of the lunar surface; the other third comprised
the "seas," the "lakes," the "marshes," the "bays" or "gulfs," and the
other divisions usually assigned to water.

To all this deeply interesting information, though the fruit of
observation the closest, aided and confirmed by calculation the
profoundest, Ardan listened with the utmost indifference. In fact, even
his French politeness could not suppress two or three decided yawns,
which of course the mathematicians were too absorbed to notice.

In their enthusiasm they tried to make him understand that though the
Moon is 13-1/2 times smaller than our Earth, she can show more than 50
thousand craters, which astronomers have already counted and designated
by specific names.

"To conclude this portion of our investigation therefore," cried
Barbican, clearing his throat, and occupying Aldan's right ear,--"the
Moon's surface is a honey combed, perforated, punctured--"

"A fistulous, a rugose, salebrous,--" cut in the Captain, close on the
left.

--"And highly cribriform superficies--" cried Barbican.

--"A sieve, a riddle, a colander--" shouted the Captain.

--"A skimming dish, a buckwheat cake, a lump of green cheese--" went on
Barbican--.

--In fact, there is no knowing how far they would have proceeded with
their designations, comparisons, and scientific expressions, had not
Ardan, driven to extremities by Barbican's last profanity, suddenly
jumped up, broken away from his companions, and clapped a forcible
extinguisher on their eloquence by putting his hands on their lips and
keeping them there awhile. Then striking a grand attitude, he looked
towards the Moon and burst out in accents of thrilling indignation:

"Pardon, O beautiful Diana of the Ephesians! Pardon, O Phoebe, thou
pearl-faced goddess of night beloved of Greece! O Isis, thou sympathetic
queen of Nile-washed cities! O Astarte, thou favorite deity of the
Syrian hills! O Artemis, thou symbolical daughter of Jupiter and Latona,
that is of light and darkness! O brilliant sister of the radiant Apollo!
enshrined in the enchanting strains of Virgil and Homer, which I only
half learned at college, and therefore unfortunately forget just now!
Otherwise what pleasure I should have had in hurling them at the heads
of Barbican, M'Nicholl, and every other barbarous iconoclast of the
nineteenth century!--"

Here he stopped short, for two reasons: first he was out of breath;
secondly, he saw that the irrepressible scientists had been too busy
making observations of their own to hear a single word of what he had
uttered, and were probably totally unconscious that he had spoken at
all. In a few seconds his breath came back in full blast, but the idea
of talking when only deaf men were listening was so disconcerting as to
leave him actually unable to get off another syllable.




CHAPTER XII.

A BIRD'S EYE VIEW OF THE LUNAR MOUNTAINS.


I am rather inclined to believe myself that not one word of Ardan's
rhapsody had been ever heard by Barbican or M'Nicholl. Long before he
had spoken his last words, they had once more become mute as statues,
and now were both eagerly watching, pencil in hand, spyglass to eye, the
northern lunar hemisphere towards which they were rapidly but indirectly
approaching. They had fully made up their minds by this time that they
were leaving far behind them the central point which they would have
probably reached half an hour ago if they had not been shunted off their
course by that inopportune bolide.

About half past twelve o'clock, Barbican broke the dead silence by
saying that after a careful calculation they were now only about 875
miles from the Moon's surface, a distance two hundred miles less in
length than the lunar radius, and which was still to be diminished as
they advanced further north. They were at that moment ten degrees north
of the equator, almost directly over the ridge lying between the _Mare
Serenitatis_ and the _Mare Tranquillitatis_. From this latitude all the
way up to the north pole the travellers enjoyed a most satisfactory view
of the Moon in all directions and under the most favorable conditions.
By means of their spyglasses, magnifying a hundred times, they cut down
this distance of 875 miles to about 9. The great telescope of the Rocky
Mountains, by its enormous magnifying power of 48,000, brought the Moon,
it is true, within a distance of 5 miles, or nearly twice as near; but
this advantage of nearness was considerably more than counterbalanced by
a want of clearness, resulting from the haziness and refractiveness of
the terrestrial atmosphere, not to mention those fatal defects in the
reflector that the art of man has not yet succeeded in remedying.
Accordingly, our travellers, armed with excellent telescopes--of just
power enough to be no injury to clearness,--and posted on unequalled
vantage ground, began already to distinguish certain details that had
probably never been noticed before by terrestrial observers. Even Ardan,
by this time quite recovered from his fit of sentiment and probably
infected a little by the scientific enthusiasm of his companions, began
to observe and note and observe and note, alternately, with all the
_sangfroid_ of a veteran astronomer.

"Friends," said Barbican, again interrupting a silence that had lasted
perhaps ten minutes, "whither we are going I can't say; if we shall ever
revisit the Earth, I can't tell. Still, it is our duty so to act in all
respects as if these labors of ours were one day to be of service to our
fellow-creatures. Let us keep our souls free from every distraction. We
are now astronomers. We see now what no mortal eye has ever gazed on
before. This Projectile is simply a work room of the great Cambridge
Observatory lifted into space. Let us take observations!"

With these words, he set to work with a renewed ardor, in which his
companions fully participated. The consequence was that they soon had
several of the outline maps covered with the best sketches they could
make of the Moon's various aspects thus presented under such favorable
circumstances. They could now remark not only that they were passing the
tenth degree of north latitude, but that the Projectile followed almost
directly the twentieth degree of east longitude.

"One thing always puzzled me when examining maps of the Moon," observed
Ardan, "and I can't say that I see it yet as clearly as if I had thought
over the matter. It is this. I could understand, when looking through a
lens at an object, why we get only its reversed image--a simple law of
optics explains _that_. Therefore, in a map of the Moon, as the bottom
means the north and the top the south, why does not the right mean the
west and the left the east? I suppose I could have made this out by a
little thought, but thinking, that is reflection, not being my forte, it
is the last thing I ever care to do. Barbican, throw me a word or two on
the subject."

"I can see what troubles you," answered Barbican, "but I can also see
that one moment's reflection would have put an end to your perplexity.
On ordinary maps of the Earth's surface when the north is the top, the
right hand must be the east, the left hand the west, and so on. That is
simply because we look _down_ from _above_. And such a map seen through
a lens will appear reversed in all respects. But in looking at the Moon,
that is _up_ from _down_, we change our position so far that our right
hand points west and our left east. Consequently, in our reversed map,
though the north becomes south, the right remains east, and--"

"Enough said! I see it at a glance! Thank you, Barbican. Why did not
they make you a professor of astronomy? Your hint will save me a world
of trouble."[C]

Aided by the _Mappa Selenographica_, the travellers could easily
recognize the different portions of the Moon over which they were now
moving. An occasional glance at our reduction of this map, given as a
frontispiece, will enable the gentle reader to follow the travellers on
the line in which they moved and to understand the remarks and
observations in which they occasionally indulged.

"Where are we now?" asked Ardan.

"Over the northern shores of the _Mare Nubium_," replied Barbican. "But
we are still too far off to see with any certainty what they are like.
What is the _Mare_ itself? A sea, according to the early astronomers? a
plain of solid sand, according to later authority? or an immense forest,
according to De la Rue of London, so far the Moon's most successful
photographer? This gentleman's authority, Ardan, would have given you
decided support in your famous dispute with the Captain at the meeting
near Tampa, for he says very decidedly that the Moon has an atmosphere,
very low to be sure but very dense. This, however, we must find out for
ourselves; and in the meantime let us affirm nothing until we have good
grounds for positive assertion."

_Mare Nubium_, though not very clearly outlined on the maps, is easily
recognized by lying directly east of the regions about the centre. It
would appear as if this vast plain were sprinkled with immense lava
blocks shot forth from the great volcanoes on the right, _Ptolemaeus_,
_Alphonse_, _Alpetragius_ and _Arzachel_. But the Projectile advanced so
rapidly that these mountains soon disappeared, and the travellers were
not long before they could distinguish the great peaks that closed the
"Sea" on its northern boundary. Here a radiating mountain showed a
summit so dazzling with the reflection of the solar rays that Ardan
could not help crying out:

"It looks like one of the carbon points of an electric light projected
on a screen! What do you call it, Barbican?"

"_Copernicus_," replied the President. "Let us examine old
_Copernicus_!"

This grand crater is deservedly considered one of the greatest of the
lunar wonders. It lifts its giant ramparts to upwards of 12,000 feet
above the level of the lunar surface. Being quite visible from the Earth
and well situated for observation, it is a favorite object for
astronomical study; this is particularly the case during the phase
existing between Last Quarter and the New Moon, when its vast shadows,
projected boldly from the east towards the west, allow its prodigious
dimensions to be measured.

After _Tycho_, which is situated in the southern hemisphere,
_Copernicus_ forms the most important radiating mountain in the lunar
disc. It looms up, single and isolated, like a gigantic light-house, on
the peninsula separating _Mare Nubium_ from _Oceanus Procellarum_ on one
side and from _Mare Imbrium_ on the other; thus illuminating with its
splendid radiation three "Seas" at a time. The wonderful complexity of
its bright streaks diverging on all sides from its centre presented a
scene alike splendid and unique. These streaks, the travellers thought,
could be traced further north than in any other direction: they fancied
they could detect them even in the _Mare Imbrium_, but this of course
might be owing to the point from which they made their observations. At
one o'clock in the morning, the Projectile, flying through space, was
exactly over this magnificent mountain.

In spite of the brilliant sunlight that was blazing around them, the
travellers could easily recognize the peculiar features of _Copernicus_.
It belongs to those ring mountains of the first class called Circuses.
Like _Kepler_ and _Aristarchus_, who rule over _Oceanus Procellarum_,
_Copernicus_, when viewed through our telescopes, sometimes glistens so
brightly through the ashy light of the Moon that it has been frequently
taken for a volcano in full activity. Whatever it may have been once,
however, it is certainly nothing more now than, like all the other
mountains on the visible side of the Moon, an extinct volcano, only with
a crater of such exceeding grandeur and sublimity as to throw utterly
into the shade everything like it on our Earth. The crater of Etna is at
most little more than a mile across. The crater of _Copernicus_ has a
diameter of at least 50 miles. Within it, the travellers could easily
discover by their glasses an immense number of terraced ridges, probably
landslips, alternating with stratifications resulting from successive
eruptions. Here and there, but particularly in the southern side, they
caught glimpses of shadows of such intense blackness, projected across
the plateau and lying there like pitch spots, that they could not tell
them from yawning chasms of incalculable depth. Outside the crater the
shadows were almost as deep, whilst on the plains all around,
particularly in the west, so many small craters could be detected that
the eye in vain attempted to count them.

"Many circular mountains of this kind," observed Barbican, "can be seen
on the lunar surface, but _Copernicus_, though not one of the greatest,
is one of the most remarkable on account of those diverging streaks of
bright light that you see radiating from its summit. By looking
steadily into its crater, you can see more cones than mortal eye ever
lit on before. They are so numerous as to render the interior plateau
quite rugged, and were formerly so many openings giving vent to fire and
volcanic matter. A curious and very common arrangement of this internal
plateau of lunar craters is its lying at a lower level than the external
plains, quite the contrary to a terrestrial crater, which generally has
its bottom much higher than the level of the surrounding country. It
follows therefore that the deep lying curve of the bottom of these ring
mountains would give a sphere with a diameter somewhat smaller than the
Moon's."

"What can be the cause of this peculiarity?" asked M'Nicholl.

"I can't tell;" answered Barbican, "but, as a conjecture, I should say
that it is probably to the comparatively smaller area of the Moon and
the more violent character of her volcanic action that the extremely
rugged character of her surface is mainly due."

"Why, it's the _Campi Phlegraei_ or the Fire Fields of Naples over
again!" cried Ardan suddenly. "There's _Monte Barbaro_, there's the
_Solfatara_, there is the crater of _Astroni_, and there is the _Monte
Nuovo_, as plain as the hand on my body!"

"The great resemblance between the region you speak of and the general
surface of the Moon has been often remarked;" observed Barbican, "but
it is even still more striking in the neighborhood of _Theophilus_ on
the borders of _Mare Nectaris_."

"That's _Mare Nectaris_, the gray spot over there on the southwest,
isn't it?" asked M'Nicholl; "is there any likelihood of our getting a
better view of it?"

"Not the slightest," answered Barbican, "unless we go round the Moon and
return this way, like a satellite describing its orbit."

By this time they had arrived at a point vertical to the mountain
centre. _Copernicus's_ vast ramparts formed a perfect circle or rather a
pair of concentric circles. All around the mountain extended a dark
grayish plain of savage aspect, on which the peak shadows projected
themselves in sharp relief. In the gloomy bottom of the crater, whose
dimensions are vast enough to swallow Mont Blanc body and bones, could
be distinguished a magnificent group of cones, at least half a mile in
height and glittering like piles of crystal. Towards the north several
breaches could be seen in the ramparts, due probably to a caving in of
immense masses accumulated on the summit of the precipitous walls.

As already observed, the surrounding plains were dotted with numberless
craters mostly of small dimensions, except _Gay Lussac_ on the north,
whose crater was about 12 miles in diameter. Towards the southwest and
the immediate east, the plain appeared to be very flat, no protuberance,
no prominence of any kind lifting itself above the general dead level.
Towards the north, on the contrary, as far as where the peninsula
jutted on _Oceanus Procellarum_, the plain looked like a sea of lava
wildly lashed for a while by a furious hurricane and then, when its
waves and breakers and driving ridges were at their wildest, suddenly
frozen into solidity. Over this rugged, rumpled, wrinkled surface and in
all directions, ran the wonderful streaks whose radiating point appeared
to be the summit of _Copernicus_. Many of them appeared to be ten miles
wide and hundreds of miles in length.

The travellers disputed for some time on the origin of these strange
radii, but could hardly be said to have arrived at any conclusion more
satisfactory than that already reached by some terrestrial observers.

To M'Nicholl's question:

"Why can't these streaks be simply prolonged mountain crests reflecting
the sun's rays more vividly by their superior altitude and comparative
smoothness?"

Barbican readily replied:

"These streaks _can't_ be mountain crests, because, if they were, under
certain conditions of solar illumination they should project
_shadows_--a thing which they have never been known to do under any
circumstances whatever. In fact, it is only during the period of the
full Moon that these streaks are seen at all; as soon as the sun's rays
become oblique, they disappear altogether--a proof that their appearance
is due altogether to peculiar advantages in their surface for the
reflection of light."

"Dear boys, will you allow me to give my little guess on the subject?"
asked Ardan.

His companions were profuse in expressing their desire to hear it.

"Well then," he resumed, "seeing that these bright streaks invariably
start from a certain point to radiate in all directions, why not suppose
them to be streams of lava issuing from the crater and flowing down the
mountain side until they cooled?"

"Such a supposition or something like it has been put forth by
Herschel," replied Barbican; "but your own sense will convince you that
it is quite untenable when you consider that lava, however hot and
liquid it may be at the commencement of its journey, cannot flow on for
hundreds of miles, up hills, across ravines, and over plains, all the
time in streams of almost exactly equal width."

"That theory of yours holds no more water than mine, Ardan," observed
M'Nicholl.

"Correct, Captain," replied the Frenchman; "Barbican has a trick of
knocking the bottom out of every weaker vessel. But let us hear what he
has to say on the subject himself. What is your theory. Barbican?"

"My theory," said Barbican, "is pretty much the same as that lately
presented by an English astronomer, Nasmyth, who has devoted much study
and reflection to lunar matters. Of course, I only formulate my theory,
I don't affirm it. These streaks are cracks, made in the Moon's surface
by cooling or by shrinkage, through which volcanic matter has been
forced up by internal pressure. The sinking ice of a frozen lake, when
meeting with some sharp pointed rock, cracks in a radiating manner:
every one of its fissures then admits the water, which immediately
spreads laterally over the ice pretty much as the lava spreads itself
over the lunar surface. This theory accounts for the radiating nature of
the streaks, their great and nearly equal thickness, their immense
length, their inability to cast a shadow, and their invisibility at any
time except at or near the Full Moon. Still it is nothing but a theory,
and I don't deny that serious objections may be brought against it."

"Do you know, dear boys," cried Ardan, led off as usual by the slightest
fancy, "do you know what I am thinking of when I look down on the great
rugged plains spread out beneath us?"

"I can't say, I'm sure," replied Barbican, somewhat piqued at the little
attention he had secured for his theory.

"Well, what are you thinking of?" asked M'Nicholl.

"Spillikins!" answered Ardan triumphantly.

"Spillikins?" cried his companions, somewhat surprised.

"Yes, Spillikins! These rocks, these blocks, these peaks, these streaks,
these cones, these cracks, these ramparts, these escarpments,--what are
they but a set of spillikins, though I acknowledge on a grand scale? I
wish I had a little hook to pull them one by one!"

[Illustration: AN IMMENSE BATTLEFIELD.]

"Oh, do be serious, Ardan!" cried Barbican, a little impatiently.

"Certainly," replied Ardan. "Let us be serious, Captain, since
seriousness best befits the subject in hand. What do you think of
another comparison? Does not this plain look like an immense battle
field piled with the bleaching bones of myriads who had slaughtered each
other to a man at the bidding of some mighty Caesar? What do you think
of that lofty comparison, hey?"

"It is quite on a par with the other," muttered Barbican.

"He's hard to please, Captain," continued Ardan, "but let us try him
again! Does not this plain look like--?"

"My worthy friend," interrupted Barbican, quietly, but in a tone to
discourage further discussion, "what you think the plain _looks like_ is
of very slight import, as long as you know no more than a child what it
really _is_!"

"Bravo, Barbican! well put!" cried the irrepressible Frenchman. "Shall I
ever realize the absurdity of my entering into an argument with a
scientist!"

But this time the Projectile, though advancing northward with a pretty
uniform velocity, had neither gained nor lost in its nearness to the
lunar disc. Each moment altering the character of the fleeting landscape
beneath them, the travellers, as may well be imagined, never thought of
taking an instant's repose. At about half past one, looking to their
right on the west, they saw the summits of another mountain; Barbican,
consulting his map, recognized _Eratosthenes_.

This was a ring mountain, about 33 miles in diameter, having, like
_Copernicus_, a crater of immense profundity containing central cones.
Whilst they were directing their glasses towards its gloomy depths,
Barbican mentioned to his friends Kepler's strange idea regarding the
formation of these ring mountains. "They must have been constructed," he
said, "by mortal hands."

"With what object?" asked the Captain.

"A very natural one," answered Barbican. "The Selenites must have
undertaken the immense labor of digging these enormous pits at places of
refuge in which they could protect themselves against the fierce solar
rays that beat against them for 15 days in succession!"

"Not a bad idea, that of the Selenites!" exclaimed Ardan.

"An absurd idea!" cried M'Nicholl. "But probably Kepler never knew the
real dimensions of these craters. Barbican knows the trouble and time
required to dig a well in Stony Hill only nine hundred feet deep. To dig
out a single lunar crater would take hundreds and hundreds of years, and
even then they should be giants who would attempt it!"

"Why so?" asked Ardan. "In the Moon, where gravity is six times less
than on the Earth, the labor of the Selenites can't be compared with
that of men like us."

"But suppose a Selenite to be six times smaller than a man like us!"
urged M'Nicholl.

"And suppose a Selenite never had an existence at all!" interposed
Barbican with his usual success in putting an end to the argument. "But
never mind the Selenites now. Observe _Eratosthenes_ as long as you have
the opportunity."

"Which will not be very long," said M'Nicholl. "He is already sinking
out of view too far to the right to be carefully observed."

"What are those peaks beyond him?" asked Ardan.

"The _Apennines_," answered Barbican; "and those on the left are the
_Carpathians_."

"I have seen very few mountain chains or ranges in the Moon," remarked
Ardan, after some minutes' observation.

"Mountains chains are not numerous in the Moon," replied Barbican, "and
in that respect her oreographic system presents a decided contrast with
that of the Earth. With us the ranges are many, the craters few; in the
Moon the ranges are few and the craters innumerable."

Barbican might have spoken of another curious feature regarding the
mountain ranges: namely, that they are chiefly confined to the northern
hemisphere, where the craters are fewest and the "seas" the most
extensive.

For the benefit of those interested, and to be done at once with this
part of the subject, we give in the following little table a list of the
chief lunar mountain chains, with their latitude, and respective
heights in English feet.

              _Name._          _Degrees of Latitude._      _Height._

            { _Altai Mountains_     17° to 28              13,000ft.
Southern    { _Cordilleras_         10  to 20              12,000
Hemisphere. { _Pyrenees_             8  to 18              12,000
            { _Riphean_              5  to 10               2,600

            { _Haemus_              10  to 20               6,300
            { _Carpathian_          15  to 19               6,000
            { _Apennines_           14  to 27              18,000
Northern    { _Taurus_              25  to 34               8,500
Hemisphere. { _Hercynian_           17  to 29               3,400
            { _Caucasus_            33  to 40              17,000
            { _Alps_                42  to 30              10,000

Of these different chains, the most important is that of the
_Apennines_, about 450 miles long, a length, however, far inferior to
that of many of the great mountain ranges of our globe. They skirt the
western shores of the _Mare Imbrium_, over which they rise in immense
cliffs, 18 or 20 thousand feet in height, steep as a wall and casting
over the plain intensely black shadows at least 90 miles long. Of Mt.
_Huyghens_, the highest in the group, the travellers were just barely
able to distinguish the sharp angular summit in the far west. To the
east, however, the _Carpathians_, extending from the 18th to 30th
degrees of east longitude, lay directly under their eyes and could be
examined in all the peculiarities of their distribution.

Barbican proposed a hypothesis regarding the formation of those
mountains, which his companions thought at least as good as any other.
Looking carefully over the _Carpathians_ and catching occasional
glimpses of semi-circular formations and half domes, he concluded that
the chain must have formerly been a succession of vast craters. Then had
come some mighty internal discharge, or rather the subsidence to which
_Mare Imbrium_ is due, for it immediately broke off or swallowed up one
half of those mountains, leaving the other half steep as a wall on one
side and sloping gently on the other to the level of the surrounding
plains. The _Carpathians_ were therefore pretty nearly in the same
condition as the crater mountains _Ptolemy_, _Alpetragius_ and
_Arzachel_ would find themselves in, if some terrible cataclysm, by
tearing away their eastern ramparts, had turned them into a chain of
mountains whose towering cliffs would nod threateningly over the western
shores of _Mare Nubium_. The mean height of the _Carpathians_ is about
6,000 feet, the altitude of certain points in the Pyrenees such as the
_Port of Pineda_, or _Roland's Breach_, in the shadow of _Mont Perdu_.
The northern slopes of the _Carpathians_ sink rapidly towards the shores
of the vast _Mare Imbrium_.

Towards two o'clock in the morning, Barbican calculated the Projectile
to be on the 20th northern parallel, and therefore almost immediately
over the little ring mountain called _Pytheas_, about 4600 feet in
height. The distance of the travellers from the Moon at this point
could not be more than about 750 miles, reduced to about 7 by means of
their excellent telescopes.

_Mare Imbrium_, the Sea of Rains here revealed itself in all its
vastness to the eyes of the travellers, though it must be acknowledged
that the immense depression so called, did not afford them a very clear
idea regarding its exact boundaries. Right ahead of them rose _Lambert_
about a mile in height; and further on, more to the left, in the
direction of _Oceanus Procellarum_, _Euler_ revealed itself by its
glittering radiations. This mountain, of about the same height as
_Lambert_, had been the object of very interesting calculations on the
part of Schroeter of Erfurt. This keen observer, desirous of inquiring
into the probable origin of the lunar mountains, had proposed to himself
the following question: Does the volume of the crater appear to be equal
to that of the surrounding ramparts? His calculations showing him that
this was generally the case, he naturally concluded that these ramparts
must therefore have been the product of a single eruption, for
successive eruptions of volcanic matter would have disturbed this
correlation. _Euler_ alone, he found, to be an exception to this general
law, as the volume of its crater appeared to be twice as great as that
of the mass surrounding it. It must therefore have been formed by
several eruptions in succession, but in that case what had become of the
ejected matter?

Theories of this nature and all manner of scientific questions were, of
course, perfectly permissible to terrestrial astronomers laboring under
the disadvantage of imperfect instruments. But Barbican could not think
of wasting his time in any speculation of the kind, and now, seeing that
his Projectile perceptibly approached the lunar disc, though he
despaired of ever reaching it, he was more sanguine than ever of being
soon able to discover positively and unquestionably some of the secrets
of its formation.

[Footnote C: We must again remind our readers that, in our map, though
every thing is set down as it appears to the eye not as it is reversed
by the telescope, still, for the reason made so clear by Barbican, the
right hand side must be the west and the left the east.]




CHAPTER XIII.

LUNAR LANDSCAPES


At half past two in the morning of December 6th, the travellers crossed
the 30th northern parallel, at a distance from the lunar surface of 625
miles, reduced to about 6 by their spy-glasses. Barbican could not yet
see the least probability of their landing at any point of the disc. The
velocity of the Projectile was decidedly slow, but for that reason
extremely puzzling. Barbican could not account for it. At such a
proximity to the Moon, the velocity, one would think, should be very
great indeed to be able to counteract the lunar attraction. Why did it
not fall? Barbican could not tell; his companions were equally in the
dark. Ardan said he gave it up. Besides they had no time to spend in
investigating it. The lunar panorama was unrolling all its splendors
beneath them, and they could not bear to lose one of its slightest
details.

The lunar disc being brought within a distance of about six miles by the
spy-glasses, it is a fair question to ask, what _could_ an aeronaut at
such an elevation from our Earth discover on its surface? At present
that question can hardly be answered, the most remarkable balloon
ascensions never having passed an altitude of five miles under
circumstances favorable for observers. Here, however, is an account,
carefully transcribed from notes taken on the spot, of what Barbican and
his companions _did_ see from their peculiar post of observation.

Varieties of color, in the first place, appeared here and there upon the
disc. Selenographers are not quite agreed as to the nature of these
colors. Not that such colors are without variety or too faint to be
easily distinguished. Schmidt of Athens even says that if our oceans on
earth were all evaporated, an observer in the Moon would hardly find the
seas and continents of our globe even so well outlined as those of the
Moon are to the eye of a terrestrial observer. According to him, the
shade of color distinguishing those vast plains known as "seas" is a
dark gray dashed with green and brown,--a color presented also by a few
of the great craters.

This opinion of Schmidt's, shared by Beer and Maedler, Barbican's
observations now convinced him to be far better founded than that of
certain astronomers who admit of no color at all being visible on the
Moon's surface but gray. In certain spots the greenish tint was quite
decided, particularly in _Mare Serenitatis_ and _Mare Humorum,_ the very
localities where Schmidt had most noticed it. Barbican also remarked
that several large craters, of the class that had no interior cones,
reflected a kind of bluish tinge, somewhat like that given forth by a
freshly polished steel plate. These tints, he now saw enough to convince
him, proceeded really from the lunar surface, and were not due, as
certain astronomers asserted, either to the imperfections of the
spy-glasses, or to the interference of the terrestrial atmosphere. His
singular opportunity for correct observation allowed him to entertain no
doubt whatever on the subject. Hampered by no atmosphere, he was free
from all liability to optical illusion. Satisfied therefore as to the
reality of these tints, he considered such knowledge a positive gain to
science. But that greenish tint--to what was it due? To a dense tropical
vegetation maintained by a low atmosphere, a mile or so in thickness?
Possibly. But this was another question that could not be answered at
present.

Further on he could detect here and there traces of a decidedly ruddy
tint. Such a shade he knew had been already detected in the _Palus
Somnii_, near _Mare Crisium_, and in the circular area of _Lichtenberg_,
near the _Hercynian Mountains_, on the eastern edge of the Moon. To what
cause was this tint to be attributed? To the actual color of the surface
itself? Or to that of the lava covering it here and there? Or to the
color resulting from the mixture of other colors seen at a distance too
great to allow of their being distinguished separately? Impossible to
tell.

Barbican and his companions succeeded no better at a new problem that
soon engaged their undivided attention. It deserves some detail.

Having passed _Lambert_, being just over _Timocharis_, all were
attentively gazing at the magnificent crater of _Archimedes_ with a
diameter of 52 miles across and ramparts more than 5000 feet in height,
when Ardan startled his companions by suddenly exclaiming:

"Hello! Cultivated fields as I am a living man!"

"What do you mean by your cultivated fields?" asked M'Nicholl sourly,
wiping his glasses and shrugging his shoulders.

"Certainly cultivated fields!" replied Ardan. "Don't you see the
furrows? They're certainly plain enough. They are white too from
glistening in the sun, but they are quite different from the radiating
streaks of _Copernicus_. Why, their sides are perfectly parallel!"

"Where are those furrows?" asked M'Nicholl, putting his glasses to his
eye and adjusting the focus.

"You can see them in all directions," answered Ardan; "but two are
particularly visible: one running north from _Archimedes_, the other
south towards the _Apennines_."

M'Nicholl's face, as he gazed, gradually assumed a grin which soon
developed into a snicker, if not a positive laugh, as he observed to
Ardan:

"Your Selenites must be Brobdignagians, their oxen Leviathans, and their
ploughs bigger than Marston's famous cannon, if these are furrows!"

"How's that, Barbican?" asked Ardan doubtfully, but unwilling to submit
to M'Nicholl.

"They're not furrows, dear friend," said Barbican, "and can't be,
either, simply on account of their immense size. They are what the
German astronomers called _Rillen_; the French, _rainures_, and the
English, _grooves_, _canals_, _clefts_, _cracks_, _chasms_, or
_fissures_."

"You have a good stock of names for them anyhow," observed Ardan, "if
that does any good."

"The number of names given them," answered Barbican, "shows how little
is really known about them. They have been observed in all the level
portion of the Moon's surface. Small as they appear to us, a little
calculation must convince you that they are in some places hundreds of
miles in length, a mile in width and probably in many points several
miles in depth. Their width and depth, however, vary, though their
sides, so far as observed, are always rigorously parallel. Let us take a
good look at them."

Putting the glass to his eye, Barbican examined the clefts for some time
with close attention. He saw that their banks were sharp edged and
extremely steep. In many places they were of such geometrical regularity
that he readily excused Gruithuysen's idea of deeming them to be
gigantic earthworks thrown up by the Selenite engineers. Some of them
were as straight as if laid out with a line, others were curved a little
here and there, though still maintaining the strict parallelism of their
sides. These crossed each other; those entered craters and came out at
the other side. Here, they furrowed annular plateaus, such as
_Posidonius_ or _Petavius_. There, they wrinkled whole seas, for
instance, _Mare Serenitatis_.

These curious peculiarities of the lunar surface had interested the
astronomic mind to a very high degree at their first discovery, and have
proved to be very perplexing problems ever since. The first observers do
not seem to have noticed them. Neither Hevelius, nor Cassini, nor La
Hire, nor Herschel, makes a single remark regarding their nature.

It was Schroeter, in 1789, who called the attention of scientists to
them for the first time. He had only 11 to show, but Lohrmann soon
recorded 75 more. Pastorff, Gruithuysen, and particularly Beer and
Maedler were still more successful, but Julius Schmidt, the famous
astronomer of Athens, has raised their number up to 425, and has even
published their names in a catalogue. But counting them is one thing,
determining their nature is another. They are not fortifications,
certainly: and cannot be ancient beds of dried up rivers, for two very
good and sufficient reasons: first, water, even under the most favorable
circumstances on the Moon's surface, could have never ploughed up such
vast channels; secondly, these chasms often traverse lofty craters
through and through, like an immense railroad cutting.

At these details, Ardan's imagination became unusually excited and of
course it was not without some result. It even happened that he hit on
an idea that had already suggested itself to Schmidt of Athens.

"Why not consider them," he asked, "to be the simple phenomena of
vegetation?"

"What do you mean?" asked Barbican.

"Rows of sugar cane?" suggested M'Nicholl with a snicker.

"Not exactly, my worthy Captain," answered Ardan quietly, "though you
were perhaps nearer to the mark than you expected. I don't mean exactly
rows of sugar cane, but I do mean vast avenues of trees--poplars, for
instance--planted regularly on each side of a great high road."

"Still harping on vegetation!" said the Captain. "Ardan, what a splendid
historian was spoiled in you! The less you know about your facts, the
readier you are to account for them."

"_Ma foi_," said Ardan simply, "I do only what the greatest of your
scientific men do--that is, guess. There is this difference however
between us--I call my guesses, guesses, mere conjecture;--they dignify
theirs as profound theories or as astounding discoveries!"

"Often the case, friend Ardan, too often the case," said Barbican.

"In the question under consideration, however," continued the Frenchman,
"my conjecture has this advantage over some others: it explains why
these rills appear and seem to disappear at regular intervals."

"Let us hear the explanation," said the Captain.

"They become invisible when the trees lose their leaves, and they
reappear when they resume them."

"His explanation is not without ingenuity," observed Barbican to
M'Nicholl, "but, my dear friend," turning to Ardan, "it is hardly
admissible."

"Probably not," said Ardan, "but why not?"

"Because as the Sun is nearly always vertical to the lunar equator, the
Moon can have no change of seasons worth mentioning; therefore her
vegetation can present none of the phenomena that you speak of."

This was perfectly true. The slight obliquity of the Moon's axis, only
1-1/2°, keeps the Sun in the same altitude the whole year around. In the
equatorial regions he is always vertical, and in the polar he is never
higher than the horizon. Therefore, there can be no change of seasons;
according to the latitude, it is a perpetual winter, spring, summer, or
autumn the whole year round. This state of things is almost precisely
similar to that which prevails in Jupiter, who also stands nearly
upright in his orbit, the inclination of his axis being only about 3°.

But how to account for the _grooves_? A very hard nut to crack. They
must certainly be a later formation than the craters and the rings, for
they are often found breaking right through the circular ramparts.
Probably the latest of all lunar features, the results of the last
geological epochs, they are due altogether to expansion or shrinkage
acting on a large scale and brought about by the great forces of nature,
operating after a manner altogether unknown on our earth. Such at least
was Barbican's idea.

"My friends," he quietly observed, "without meaning to put forward any
pretentious claims to originality, but by simply turning to account some
advantages that have never before befallen contemplative mortal eye, why
not construct a little hypothesis of our own regarding the nature of
these grooves and the causes that gave them birth? Look at that great
chasm just below us, somewhat to the right. It is at least fifty or
sixty miles long and runs along the base of the _Apennines_ in a line
almost perfectly straight. Does not its parallelism with the mountain
chain suggest a causative relation? See that other mighty _rill_, at
least a hundred and fifty miles long, starting directly north of it and
pursuing so true a course that it cleaves _Archimedes_ almost cleanly
into two. The nearer it lies to the mountain, as you perceive, the
greater its width; as it recedes in either direction it grows narrower.
Does not everything point out to one great cause of their origin? They
are simple crevasses, like those so often noticed on Alpine glaciers,
only that these tremendous cracks in the surface are produced by the
shrinkage of the crust consequent on cooling. Can we point out some
analogies to this on the Earth? Certainly. The defile of the Jordan,
terminating in the awful depression of the Dead Sea, no doubt occurs to
you on the moment. But the _Yosemite Valley_, as I saw it ten years ago,
is an apter comparison. There I stood on the brink of a tremendous chasm
with perpendicular walls, a mile in width, a mile in depth and eight
miles in length. Judge if I was astounded! But how should we feel it,
when travelling on the lunar surface, we should suddenly find ourselves
on the brink of a yawning chasm two miles wide, fifty miles long, and so
fathomless in sheer vertical depth as to leave its black profundities
absolutely invisible in spite of the dazzling sunlight!"

"I feel my flesh already crawling even in the anticipation!" cried
Ardan.

"I shan't regret it much if we never get to the Moon," growled
M'Nicholl; "I never hankered after it anyhow!"

By this time the Projectile had reached the fortieth degree of lunar
latitude, and could hardly be further than five hundred miles from the
surface, a distance reduced to about 5 miles by the travellers' glasses.
Away to their left appeared _Helicon_, a ring mountain about 1600 feet
high; and still further to the left the eye could catch a glimpse of the
cliffs enclosing a semi-elliptical portion of _Mare Imbrium_, called the
_Sinus Iridium_, or Bay of the Rainbows.

In order to allow astronomers to make complete observations on the lunar
surface, the terrestrial atmosphere should possess a transparency
seventy times greater than its present power of transmission. But in the
void through which the Projectile was now floating, no fluid whatever
interposed between the eye of the observer and the object observed.
Besides, the travellers now found themselves at a distance that had
never before been reached by the most powerful telescopes, including
even Lord Rosse's and the great instrument on the Rocky Mountains.
Barbican was therefore in a condition singularly favorable to resolve
the great question concerning the Moon's inhabitableness. Nevertheless,
the solution still escaped him. He could discover nothing around him but
a dreary waste of immense plains, and towards the north, beneath him,
bare mountains of the aridest character.

Not the slightest vestige of man's work could be detected over the vast
expanse. Not the slightest sign of a ruin spoke of his ever having been
there. Nothing betrayed the slightest trace of the development of animal
life, even in an inferior degree. No movement. Not the least glimpse of
vegetation. Of the three great kingdoms that hold dominion on the
surface of the globe, the mineral, the vegetable and the animal, one
alone was represented on the lunar sphere: the mineral, the whole
mineral, and nothing but the mineral.

"Why!" exclaimed Ardan, with a disconcerted look, after a long and
searching examination, "I can't find anybody. Everything is as
motionless as a street in Pompeii at 4 o'clock in the morning!"

[Illustration: THE SOLUTION STILL ESCAPED HIM.]

"Good comparison, friend Ardan;" observed M'Nicholl. "Lava, slag,
volcanic eminences, vitreous matter glistening like ice, piles of
scoria, pitch black shadows, dazzling streaks, like rivers of light
breaking over jagged rocks--these are now beneath my eye--these alone I
can detect--not a man--not an animal--not a tree. The great American
Desert is a land of milk and honey in comparison with the joyless orb
over which we are now moving. However, even yet we can predicate
nothing positive. The atmosphere may have taken refuge in the depths of
the chasms, in the interior of the craters, or even on the opposite side
of the Moon, for all we know!"

"Still we must remember," observed Barbican, "that even the sharpest eye
cannot detect a man at a distance greater than four miles and a-half,
and our glasses have not yet brought us nearer than five."

"Which means to say," observed Ardan, "that though we can't see the
Selenites, they can see our Projectile!"

But matters had not improved much when, towards four o'clock in the
morning, the travellers found themselves on the 50th parallel, and at a
distance of only about 375 miles from the lunar surface. Still no trace
of the least movement, or even of the lowest form of life.

"What peaked mountain is that which we have just passed on our right?"
asked Ardan. "It is quite remarkable, standing as it does in almost
solitary grandeur in the barren plain."

"That is _Pico_," answered Barbican. "It is at least 8000 feet high and
is well known to terrestrial astronomers as well by its peculiar shadow
as on account of its comparative isolation. See the collection of
perfectly formed little craters nestling around its base."

"Barbican," asked M'Nicholl suddenly, "what peak is that which lies
almost directly south of _Pico_? I see it plainly, but I can't find it
on my map."

"I have remarked that pyramidal peak myself," replied Barbican; "but I
can assure you that so far it has received no name as yet, although it
is likely enough to have been distinguished by the terrestrial
astronomers. It can't be less than 4000 feet in height."

"I propose we called it _Barbican_!" cried Ardan enthusiastically.

"Agreed!" answered M'Nicholl, "unless we can find a higher one."

"We must be before-hand with Schmidt of Athens!" exclaimed Ardan. "He
will leave nothing unnamed that his telescope can catch a glimpse of."

"Passed unanimously!" cried M'Nicholl.

"And officially recorded!" added the Frenchman, making the proper entry
on his map.

"_Salve, Mt. Barbican!_" then cried both gentlemen, rising and taking
off their hats respectfully to the distant peak.

"Look to the west!" interrupted Barbican, watching, as usual, while his
companions were talking, and probably perfectly unconscious of what they
were saying; "directly to the west! Now tell me what you see!"

"I see a vast valley!" answered M'Nicholl.

"Straight as an arrow!" added Ardan.

"Running through lofty mountains!" cried M'Nicholl.

"Cut through with a pair of saws and scooped out with a chisel!" cried
Ardan.

"See the shadows of those peaks!" cried M'Nicholl catching fire at the
sight. "Black, long, and sharp as if cast by cathedral spires!"

"Oh! ye crags and peaks!" burst forth Ardan; "how I should like to catch
even a faint echo of the chorus you could chant, if a wild storm roared
over your beetling summits! The pine forests of Norwegian mountains
howling in midwinter would not be an accordeon in comparison!"

"Wonderful instance of subsidence on a grand scale!" exclaimed the
Captain, hastily relapsing into science.

"Not at all!" cried the Frenchman, still true to his colors; "no
subsidence there! A comet simply came too close and left its mark as it
flew past."

"Fanciful exclamations, dear friends," observed Barbican; "but I'm not
surprised at your excitement. Yonder is the famous _Valley of the Alps_,
a standing enigma to all selenographers. How it could have been formed,
no one can tell. Even wilder guesses than yours, Ardan, have been
hazarded on the subject. All we can state positively at present
regarding this wonderful formation, is what I have just recorded in my
note-book: the _Valley of the Alps_ is about 5 mile wide and 70 or 80
long: it is remarkably flat and free from _debris_, though the mountains
on each side rise like walls to the height of at least 10,000
feet.--Over the whole surface of our Earth I know of no natural
phenomenon that can be at all compared with it."

"Another wonder almost in front of us!" cried Ardan. "I see a vast lake
black as pitch and round as a crater; it is surrounded by such lofty
mountains that their shadows reach clear across, rendering the interior
quite invisible!"

"That's _Plato_;" said M'Nicholl; "I know it well; it's the darkest spot
on the Moon: many a night I gazed at it from my little observatory in
Broad Street, Philadelphia."

"Right, Captain," said Barbican; "the crater _Plato_, is, indeed,
generally considered the blackest spot on the Moon, but I am inclined to
consider the spots _Grimaldi_ and _Riccioli_ on the extreme eastern edge
to be somewhat darker. If you take my glass, Ardan, which is of somewhat
greater power than yours, you will distinctly see the bottom of the
crater. The reflective power of its plateau probably proceeds from the
exceedingly great number of small craters that you can detect there."

"I think I see something like them now," said Ardan. "But I am sorry the
Projectile's course will not give us a vertical view."

"Can't be helped!" said Barbican; "we must go where it takes us. The day
may come when man can steer the projectile or the balloon in which he is
shut up, in any way he pleases, but that day has not come yet!"

Towards five in the morning, the northern limit of _Mare Imbrium_ was
finally passed, and _Mare Frigoris_ spread its frost-colored plains
far to the right and left. On the east the travellers could easily see
the ring-mountain _Condamine_, about 4000 feet high, while a little
ahead on the right they could plainly distinguish _Fontenelle_ with an
altitude nearly twice as great. _Mare Frigoris_ was soon passed, and the
whole lunar surface beneath the travellers, as far as they could see in
all directions, now bristled with mountains, crags, and peaks. Indeed,
at the 70th parallel the "Seas" or plains seem to have come to an end.
The spy-glasses now brought the surface to within about three miles, a
distance less than that between the hotel at Chamouni and the summit of
Mont Blanc. To the left, they had no difficulty in distinguishing the
ramparts of _Philolaus_, about 12,000 feet high, but though the crater
had a diameter of nearly thirty miles, the black shadows prevented the
slightest sign of its interior from being seen. The Sun was now sinking
very low, and the illuminated surface of the Moon was reduced to a
narrow rim.

By this time, too, the bird's eye view to which the observations had so
far principally confined, decidedly altered its character. They could
now look back at the lunar mountains that they had been just sailing
over--a view somewhat like that enjoyed by a tourist standing on the
summit of Mt. St. Gothard as he sees the sun setting behind the peaks of
the Bernese Oberland. The lunar landscapes however, though seen under
these new and ever varying conditions, "hardly gained much by the
change," according to Ardan's expression. On the contrary, they looked,
if possible, more dreary and inhospitable than before.

The Moon having no atmosphere, the benefit of this gaseous envelope in
softening off and nicely shading the approaches of light and darkness,
heat and cold, is never felt on her surface. There, no twilight ever
softly ushers in the brilliant sun, or sweetly heralds the near approach
of night's dark shadow. Night follows day, and day night, with the
startling suddenness of a match struck or a lamp extinguished in a
cavern. Nor can it present any gradual transition from either extreme of
temperature. Hot jumps to cold, and cold jumps to hot. A moment after a
glacial midnight, it is a roasting noon. Without an instant's warning
the temperature falls from 212° Fahrenheit to the icy winter of
interstellar space. The surface is all dazzling glare, or pitchy gloom.
Wherever the direct rays of the sun do not fall, darkness reigns
supreme. What we call diffused light on Earth, the grateful result of
refraction, the luminous matter held in suspension by the air, the
mother of our dawns and our dusks, of our blushing mornings and our dewy
eyes, of our shades, our penumbras, our tints and all the other magical
effects of _chiaro-oscuro_--this diffused light has absolutely no
existence on the surface of the Moon. Nothing is there to break the
inexorable contrast between intense white and intense black. At mid-day,
let a Selenite shade his eyes and look at the sky: it will appear to him
as black as pitch, while the stars still sparkle before him as vividly
as they do to us on the coldest and darkest night in winter.

From this you can judge of the impression made on our travellers by
those strange lunar landscapes. Even their decided novelty and very
strange character produced any thing but a pleasing effect on the organs
of sight. With all their enthusiasm, the travellers felt their eyes "get
out of gear," as Ardan said, like those of a man blind from his birth
and suddenly restored to sight. They could not adjust them so as to be
able to realize the different plains of vision. All things seemed in a
heap. Foreground and background were indistinguishably commingled. No
painter could ever transfer a lunar landscape to his canvas.

"Landscape," Ardan said; "what do you mean by a landscape? Can you call
a bottle of ink intensely black, spilled over a sheet of paper intensely
white, a landscape?"

At the eightieth degree, when the Projectile was hardly 100 miles
distant from the Moon, the aspect of things underwent no improvement. On
the contrary, the nearer the travellers approached the lunar surface,
the drearier, the more inhospitable, and the more _unearthly_,
everything seem to look. Still when five o'clock in the morning brought
our travellers to within 50 miles of _Mount Gioja_--which their
spy-glasses rendered as visible as if it was only about half a mile off,
Ardan could not control himself.

"Why, we're there" he exclaimed; "we can touch her with our hands! Open
the windows and let me out! Don't mind letting me go by myself. It is
not very inviting quarters I admit. But as we are come to the jumping
off place, I want to see the whole thing through. Open the lower window
and let me out. I can take care of myself!"

"That's what's more than any other man can do," said M'Nicholl drily,
"who wants to take a jump of 50 miles!"

"Better not try it, friend Ardan," said Barbican grimly: "think of
Satellite! The Moon is no more attainable by your body than by our
Projectile. You are far more comfortable in here than when floating
about in empty space like a bolide."

Ardan, unwilling to quarrel with his companions, appeared to give in;
but he secretly consoled himself by a hope which he had been
entertaining for some time, and which now looked like assuming the
appearance of a certainty. The Projectile had been lately approaching
the Moon's surface so rapidly that it at last seemed actually impossible
not to finally touch it somewhere in the neighborhood of the north pole,
whose dazzling ridges now presented themselves in sharp and strong
relief against the black sky. Therefore he kept silent, but quietly
bided his time.

The Projectile moved on, evidently getting nearer and nearer to the
lunar surface. The Moon now appeared to the travellers as she does to us
towards the beginning of her Second Quarter, that is as a bright
crescent instead of a hemisphere. On one side, glaring dazzling light;
on the other, cavernous pitchy darkness. The line separating both was
broken into a thousand bits of protuberances and concavities, dented,
notched, and jagged.

At six o'clock the travellers found themselves exactly over the north
pole. They were quietly gazing at the rapidly shifting features of the
wondrous view unrolling itself beneath them, and were silently wondering
what was to come next, when, suddenly, the Projectile passed the
dividing line. The Sun and Moon instantly vanished from view. The next
moment, without the slightest warning the travellers found themselves
plunged in an ocean of the most appalling darkness!




CHAPTER XIV.

A NIGHT OF FIFTEEN DAYS.


The Projectile being not quite 30 miles from the Moon's north pole when
the startling phenomenon, recorded in our last chapter, took place, a
few seconds were quite sufficient to launch it at once from the
brightest day into the unknown realms of night. The transition was so
abrupt, so unexpected, without the slightest shading off, from dazzling
effulgence to Cimmerian gloom, that the Moon seemed to have been
suddenly extinguished like a lamp when the gas is turned off.

"Where's the Moon?" cried Ardan in amazement.

"It appears as if she had been wiped out of creation!" cried M'Nicholl.

Barbican said nothing, but observed carefully. Not a particle, however,
could he see of the disc that had glittered so resplendently before his
eyes a few moments ago. Not a shadow, not a gleam, not the slightest
vestige could he trace of its existence. The darkness being profound,
the dazzling splendor of the stars only gave a deeper blackness to the
pitchy sky. No wonder. The travellers found themselves now in a night
that had plenty of time not only to become black itself, but to steep
everything connected with it in palpable blackness. This was the night
354-1/4 hours long, during which the invisible face of the Moon is
turned away from the Sun. In this black darkness the Projectile now
fully participated. Having plunged into the Moon's shadow, it was as
effectually cut off from the action of the solar rays as was every point
on the invisible lunar surface itself.

The travellers being no longer able to see each other, it was proposed
to light the gas, though such an unexpected demand on a commodity at
once so scarce and so valuable was certainly disquieting. The gas, it
will be remembered, had been intended for heating alone, not
illumination, of which both Sun and Moon had promised a never ending
supply. But here both Sun and Moon, in a single instant vanished from
before their eyes and left them in Stygian darkness.

"It's all the Sun's fault!" cried Ardan, angrily trying to throw the
blame on something, and, like every angry man in such circumstances,
bound to be rather nonsensical.

"Put the saddle on the right horse, Ardan," said M'Nicholl
patronizingly, always delighted at an opportunity of counting a point
off the Frenchman. "You mean it's all the Moon's fault, don't you, in
setting herself like a screen between us and the Sun?"

"No, I don't!" cried Ardan, not at all soothed by his friend's
patronizing tone, and sticking like a man to his first assertion right
or wrong. "I know what I say! It will be all the Sun's fault if we use
up our gas!"

"Nonsense!" said M'Nicholl. "It's the Moon, who by her interposition has
cut off the Sun's light."

"The Sun had no business to allow it to be cut off," said Ardan, still
angry and therefore decidedly loose in his assertions.

Before M'Nicholl could reply, Barbican interposed, and his even voice
was soon heard pouring balm on the troubled waters.

"Dear friends," he observed, "a little reflection on either side would
convince you that our present situation is neither the Moon's fault nor
the Sun's fault. If anything is to be blamed for it, it is our
Projectile which, instead of rigidly following its allotted course, has
awkwardly contrived to deviate from it. However, strict justice must
acquit even the Projectile. It only obeyed a great law of nature in
shifting its course as soon as it came within the sphere of that
inopportune bolide's influence."

"All right!" said Ardan, as usual in the best of humor after Barbican
had laid down the law. "I have no doubt it is exactly as you say; and,
now that all is settled, suppose we take breakfast. After such a hard
night spent in work, a little refreshment would not be out of place!"

Such a proposition being too reasonable even for M'Nicholl to oppose,
Ardan turned on the gas, and had everything ready for the meal in a few
minutes. But, this time, breakfast was consumed in absolute silence. No
toasts were offered, no hurrahs were uttered. A painful uneasiness had
seized the hearts of the daring travellers. The darkness into which
they were so suddenly plunged, told decidedly on their spirits. They
felt almost as if they had been suddenly deprived of their sight. That
thick, dismal savage blackness, which Victor Hugo's pen is so fond of
occasionally revelling in, surrounded them on all sides and crushed them
like an iron shroud.

It was felt worse than ever when, breakfast being over, Ardan carefully
turned off the gas, and everything within the Projectile was as dark as
without. However, though they could not see each other's faces, they
could hear each other's voices, and therefore they soon began to talk.
The most natural subject of conversation was this terrible night 354
hours long, which the laws of nature have imposed on the Lunar
inhabitants. Barbican undertook to give his friends some explanation
regarding the cause of the startling phenomenon, and the consequences
resulting from it.

"Yes, startling is the word for it," observed Barbican, replying to a
remark of Ardan's; "and still more so when we reflect that not only are
both lunar hemispheres deprived, by turns, of sun light for nearly 15
days, but that also the particular hemisphere over which we are at this
moment floating is all that long night completely deprived of
earth-light. In other words, it is only one side of the Moon's disc that
ever receives any light from the Earth. From nearly every portion of one
side of the Moon, the Earth is always as completely absent as the Sun is
from us at midnight. Suppose an analogous case existed on the Earth;
suppose, for instance, that neither in Europe, Asia or North America
was the Moon ever visible--that, in fact, it was to be seen only at our
antipodes. With what astonishment should we contemplate her for the
first time on our arrival in Australia or New Zealand!"

"Every man of us would pack off to Australia to see her!" cried Ardan.

"Yes," said M'Nicholl sententiously; "for a visit to the South Sea a
Turk would willingly forego Mecca; and a Bostonian would prefer Sidney
even to Paris."

"Well," resumed Barbican, "this interesting marvel is reserved for the
Selenite that inhabits the side of the Moon which is always turned away
from our globe."

"And which," added the Captain, "we should have had the unspeakable
satisfaction of contemplating if we had only arrived at the period when
the Sun and the Earth are not at the same side of the Moon--that is, 15
days sooner or later than now."

"For my part, however," continued Barbican, not heeding these
interruptions, "I must confess that, notwithstanding the magnificent
splendor of the spectacle when viewed for the first time by the Selenite
who inhabits the dark side of the Moon, I should prefer to be a resident
on the illuminated side. The former, when his long, blazing, roasting,
dazzling day is over, has a night 354 hours long, whose darkness, like
that, just now surrounding us, is ever unrelieved save by the cold
cheerless rays of the stars. But the latter has hardly seen his fiery
sun sinking on one horizon when he beholds rising on the opposite one an
orb, milder, paler, and colder indeed than the Sun, but fully as large
as thirteen of our full Moons, and therefore shedding thirteen times as
much light. This would be our Earth. It would pass through all its
phases too, exactly like our Satellite. The Selenites would have their
New Earth, Full Earth, and Last Quarter. At midnight, grandly
illuminated, it would shine with the greatest glory. But that is almost
as much as can be said for it. Its futile heat would but poorly
compensate for its superior radiance. All the calorie accumulated in the
lunar soil during the 354 hours day would have by this time radiated
completely into space. An intensity of cold would prevail, in comparison
to which a Greenland winter is tropical. The temperature of interstellar
space, 250° below zero, would be reached. Our Selenite, heartily tired
of the cold pale Earth, would gladly see her sink towards the horizon,
waning as she sank, till at last she appeared no more than half full.
Then suddenly a faint rim of the solar orb reveals itself on the edge of
the opposite sky. Slowly, more than 14 times more slowly than with us,
does the Sun lift himself above the lunar horizon. In half an hour, only
half his disc is revealed, but that is more than enough to flood the
lunar landscape with a dazzling intensity of light, of which we have no
counterpart on Earth. No atmosphere refracts it, no hazy screen softens
it, no enveloping vapor absorbs it, no obstructing medium colors it. It
breaks on the eye, harsh, white, dazzling, blinding, like the electric
light seen a few yards off. As the hours wear away, the more blasting
becomes the glare; and the higher he rises in the black sky, but slowly,
slowly. It takes him seven of our days to reach the meridian. By that
time the heat has increased from an arctic temperature to double the
boiling water point, from 250° below zero to 500° above it, or the point
at which tin melts. Subjected to these extremes, the glassy rocks crack,
shiver and crumble away; enormous land slides occur; peaks topple over;
and tons of debris, crashing down the mountains, are swallowed up
forever in the yawing chasms of the bottomless craters."

"Bravo!" cried Ardan, clapping his hands softly: "our President is
sublime! He reminds me of the overture of _Guillaume Tell_!"

"Souvenir de Marston!" growled M'Nicholl.

"These phenomena," continued Barbican, heedless of interruption and his
voice betraying a slight glow of excitement, "these phenomena going on
without interruption from month to month, from year to year, from age to
age, from _eon_ to _eon_, have finally convinced me that--what?" he
asked his hearers, interrupting himself suddenly.

--"That the existence at the present time--" answered M'Nicholl.

--"Of either animal or vegetable life--" interrupted Ardan.

--"In the Moon is hardly possible!" cried both in one voice.

"Besides?" asked Barbican: "even if there _is_ any life--?"

--"That to live on the dark side would be much more inconvenient than on
the light side!" cried M'Nicholl promptly.

--"That there is no choice between them!" cried Ardan just as ready.
"For my part, I should think a residence on Mt. Erebus or in Grinnell
Land a terrestrial paradise in comparison to either. The _Earth shine_
might illuminate the light side of the Moon a little during the long
night, but for any practical advantage towards heat or life, it would be
perfectly useless!"

"But there is another serious difference between the two sides," said
Barbican, "in addition to those enumerated. The dark side is actually
more troubled with excessive variations of temperature than the light
one."

"That assertion of our worthy President," interrupted Ardan, "with all
possible respect for his superior knowledge, I am disposed to question."

"It's as clear as day!" said Barbican.

"As clear as mud, you mean, Mr. President;" interrupted Ardan, "the
temperature of the light side is excited by two objects at the same
time, the Earth and the Sun, whereas--"

--"I beg your pardon, Ardan--" said Barbican.

--"Granted, dear boy--granted with the utmost pleasure!" interrupted the
Frenchman.

"I shall probably have to direct my observations altogether to you,
Captain," continued Barbican; "friend Michael interrupts me so often
that I'm afraid he can hardly understand my remarks."

"I always admired your candor, Barbican," said Ardan; "it's a noble
quality, a grand quality!"

"Don't mention it," replied Barbican, turning towards M'Nicholl, still
in the dark, and addressing him exclusively; "You see, my dear Captain,
the period at which the Moon's invisible side receives at once its light
and heat is exactly the period of her _conjunction_, that is to say,
when she is lying between the Earth and the Sun. In comparison therefore
with the place which she had occupied at her _opposition_, or when her
visible side was fully illuminated, she is nearer to the Sun by double
her distance from the Earth, or nearly 480 thousand miles. Therefore, my
dear Captain, you can see how when the invisible side of the Moon is
turned towards the Sun, she is nearly half a million of miles nearer to
him than she had been before. Therefore, her heat should be so much the
greater."

"I see it at a glance," said the Captain.

"Whereas--" continued Barbican.

"One moment!" cried Ardan.

"Another interruption!" exclaimed Barbican; "What is the meaning of it,
Sir?"

"I ask my honorable friend the privilege of the floor for one moment,"
cried Ardan.

"What for?"

"To continue the explanation."

"Why so?"

"To show that I can understand as well as interrupt!"

"You have the floor!" exclaimed Barbican, in a voice no longer showing
any traces of ill humor.

"I expected no less from the honorable gentleman's well known courtesy,"
replied Ardan. Then changing his manner and imitating to the life
Barbican's voice, articulation, and gestures, he continued: "Whereas,
you see, my dear Captain, the period at which the Moon's visible side
receives at once its light and heat, is exactly the period of her
_opposition_, that is to say, when she is lying on one side of the Earth
and the Sun at the other. In comparison therefore with the point which
she had occupied in _conjunction_, or when her invisible side was fully
illuminated, she is farther from the Sun by double her distance from the
Earth, or nearly 480,000 miles. Therefore, my dear Captain, you can
readily see how when the Moon's invisible side is turned _from_ the Sun,
she is nearly half a million miles further from him than she had been
before. Therefore her heat should be so much the less."

"Well done, friend Ardan!" cried Barbican, clapping his hands with
pleasure. "Yes, Captain, he understood it as well as either of us the
whole time. Intelligence, not indifference, caused him to interrupt.
Wonderful fellow!"

"That's the kind of a man I am!" replied Ardan, not without some degree
of complacency. Then he added simply: "Barbican, my friend, if I
understand your explanations so readily, attribute it all to their
astonishing lucidity. If I have any faculity, it is that of being able
to scent common sense at the first glimmer. Your sentences are so
steeped in it that I catch their full meaning long before you end
them--hence my apparent inattention. But we're not yet done with the
visible face of the Moon: it seems to me you have not yet enumerated all
the advantages in which it surpasses the other side."

"Another of these advantages," continued Barbican, "is that it is from
the visible side alone that eclipses of the Sun can be seen. This is
self-evident, the interposition of the Earth being possible only between
this visible face and the Sun. Furthermore, such eclipses of the Sun
would be of a far more imposing character than anything of the kind to
be witnessed from our Earth. This is chiefly for two reasons: first,
when we, terrestrians, see the Sun eclipsed, we notice that, the discs
of the two orbs being of about the same apparent size, one cannot hide
the other except for a short time; second, as the two bodies are moving
in opposite directions, the total duration of the eclipse, even under
the most favorable circumstances, can't last longer than 7 minutes.
Whereas to a Selenite who sees the Earth eclipse the Sun, not only does
the Earth's disc appear four times larger than the Sun's, but also, as
his day is 14 times longer than ours, the two heavenly bodies must
remain several hours in contact. Besides, notwithstanding the apparent
superiority of the Earth's disc, the refracting power of the atmosphere
will never allow the Sun to be eclipsed altogether. Even when completely
screened by the Earth, he would form a beautiful circle around her of
yellow, red, and crimson light, in which she would appear to float like
a vast sphere of jet in a glowing sea of gold, rubies, sparkling
carbuncles and garnets."

"It seems to me," said M'Nicholl, "that, taking everything into
consideration, the invisible side has been rather shabbily treated."

"I know I should not stay there very long," said Ardan; "the desire of
seeing such a splendid sight as that eclipse would be enough to bring me
to the visible side as soon as possible."

"Yes, I have no doubt of that, friend Michael," pursued Barbican; "but
to see the eclipse it would not be necessary to quit the dark hemisphere
altogether. You are, of course, aware that in consequence of her
librations, or noddings, or wobblings, the Moon presents to the eyes of
the Earth a little more than the exact half of her disc. She has two
motions, one on her path around the Earth, and the other a shifting
around on her own axis by which she endeavors to keep the same side
always turned towards our sphere. This she cannot always do, as while
one motion, the latter, is strictly uniform, the other being eccentric,
sometimes accelerating her and sometimes retarding, she has not time to
shift herself around completely and with perfect correspondence of
movement. At her perigee, for instance, she moves forward quicker than
she can shift, so that we detect a portion of her western border before
she has time to conceal it. Similarly, at her apogee, when her rate of
motion is comparatively slow, she shifts a little too quickly for her
velocity, and therefore cannot help revealing a certain portion of her
eastern border. She shows altogether about 8 degrees of the dark side,
about 4 at the east and 4 at the west, so that, out of her 360 degrees,
about 188, in other words, a little more than 57 per cent., about 4/7 of
the entire surface, becomes visible to human eyes. Consequently a
Selenite could catch an occasional glimpse of our Earth, without
altogether quitting the dark side."

"No matter for that!" cried Ardan; "if we ever become Selenites we must
inhabit the visible side. My weak point is light, and that I must have
when it can be got."

"Unless, as perhaps in this case, you might be paying too dear for it,"
observed M'Nicholl. "How would you like to pay for your light by the
loss of the atmosphere, which, according to some philosophers, is piled
away on the dark side?"

"Ah! In that case I should consider a little before committing myself,"
replied Ardan, "I should like to hear your opinion regarding such a
notion, Barbican. Hey! Do your hear? Have astronomers any valid reasons
for supposing the atmosphere to have fled to the dark side of the Moon?"

"Defer that question till some other time, Ardan," whispered M'Nicholl;
"Barbican is just now thinking out something that interests him far more
deeply than any empty speculation of astronomers. If you are near the
window, look out through it towards the Moon. Can you see anything?"

"I can feel the window with my hand; but for all I can see, I might as
well be over head and ears in a hogshead of ink."

The two friends kept up a desultory conversation, but Barbican did not
hear them. One fact, in particular, troubled him, and he sought in vain
to account for it. Having come so near the Moon--about 30 miles--why had
not the Projectile gone all the way? Had its velocity been very great,
the tendency to fall could certainly be counteracted. But the velocity
being undeniably very moderate, how explain such a decided resistance to
Lunar attraction? Had the Projectile come within the sphere of some
strange unknown influence? Did the neighborhood of some mysterious body
retain it firmly imbedded in ether? That it would never reach the Moon,
was now beyond all doubt; but where was it going? Nearer to her or
further off? Or was it rushing resistlessly into infinity on the wings
of that pitchy night? Who could tell, know, calculate--who could even
guess, amid the horror of this gloomy blackness? Questions, like these,
left Barbican no rest; in vain he tried to grapple with them; he felt
like a child before them, baffled and almost despairing.

In fact, what could be more tantalizing? Just outside their windows,
only a few leagues off, perhaps only a few miles, lay the radiant planet
of the night, but in every respect as far off from the eyes of himself
and his companions as if she was hiding at the other side of Jupiter!
And to their ears she was no nearer. Earthquakes of the old Titanic type
might at that very moment be upheaving her surface with resistless
force, crashing mountain against mountain as fiercely as wave meets wave
around the storm-lashed cliffs of Cape Horn. But not the faintest far
off murmur even of such a mighty tumult could break the dead brooding
silence that surrounded the travellers. Nay, the Moon, realizing the
weird fancy of the Arabian poet, who calls her a "giant stiffening into
granite, but struggling madly against his doom," might shriek, in a
spasm of agony, loudly enough to be heard in Sirius. But our travellers
could not hear it. Their ears no sound could now reach. They could no
more detect the rending of a continent than the falling of a feather.
Air, the propagator and transmitter of sound, was absent from her
surface. Her cries, her struggles, her groans, were all smothered
beneath the impenetrable tomb of eternal silence!

These were some of the fanciful ideas by which Ardan tried to amuse his
companions in the present unsatisfactory state of affairs. His efforts,
however well meant, were not successful. M'Nicholl's growls were more
savage than usual, and even Barbican's patience was decidedly giving
way. The loss of the other face they could have easily borne--with most
of its details they had been already familiar. But, no, it must be the
dark face that now escaped their observation! The very one that for
numberless reasons they were actually dying to see! They looked out of
the windows once more at the black Moon beneath them.

There it lay below them, a round black spot, hiding the sweet faces of
the stars, but otherwise no more distinguishable by the travellers than
if they were lying in the depths of the Mammoth Cave of Kentucky. And
just think. Only fifteen days before, that dark face had been splendidly
illuminated by the solar beams, every crater lustrous, every peak
sparkling, every streak glistening under the vertical ray. In fifteen
days later, a day light the most brilliant would have replaced a
midnight the most Cimmerian. But in fifteen days later, where would the
Projectile be? In what direction would it have been drawn by the forces
innumerable of attractions incalculable? To such a question as this,
even Ardan would reply only by an ominous shake of the head.

We know already that our travellers, as well as astronomers generally,
judging from that portion of the dark side occasionally revealed by the
Moon's librations, were _pretty certain_ that there is no great
difference between her two sides, as far as regards their physical
constitutions. This portion, about the seventh part, shows plains and
mountains, circles and craters, all of precisely the same nature as
those already laid down on the chart. Judging therefore from analogy,
the other three-sevenths are, in all probability a world in every
respect exactly like the visible face--that is, arid, desert, dead. But
our travellers also knew that _pretty certain_ is far from _quite
certain_, and that arguing merely from analogy may enable you to give a
good guess, but can never lead you to an undoubted conclusion. What if
the atmosphere had really withdrawn to this dark face? And if air, why
not water? Would not this be enough to infuse life into the whole
continent? Why should not vegetation flourish on its plains, fish in its
seas, animals in its forests, and man in every one of its zones that
were capable of sustaining life? To these interesting questions, what a
satisfaction it would be to be able to answer positively one way or
another! For thousands of difficult problems a mere glimpse at this
hemisphere would be enough to furnish a satisfactory reply. How glorious
it would be to contemplate a realm on which the eye of man has never yet
rested!

Great, therefore, as you may readily conceive, was the depression of our
travellers' spirits, as they pursued their way, enveloped in a veil of
darkness the most profound. Still even then Ardan, as usual, formed
somewhat of an exception. Finding it impossible to see a particle of the
Lunar surface, he gave it up for good, and tried to console himself by
gazing at the stars, which now fairly blazed in the spangled heavens.
And certainly never before had astronomer enjoyed an opportunity for
gazing at the heavenly bodies under such peculiar advantages. How Fraye
of Paris, Chacornac of Lyons, and Father Secchi of Rome would have
envied him!

For, candidly and truly speaking, never before had mortal eye revelled
on such a scene of starry splendor. The black sky sparkled with lustrous
fires, like the ceiling of a vast hall of ebony encrusted with flashing
diamonds. Ardan's eye could take in the whole extent in an easy sweep
from the _Southern Cross_ to the _Little Bear_, thus embracing within
one glance not only the two polar stars of the present day, but also
_Campus_ and _Vega_, which, by reason of the _precession of the
Equinoxes_, are to be our polar stars 12,000 years hence. His
imagination, as if intoxicated, reeled wildly through these sublime
infinitudes and got lost in them. He forgot all about himself and all
about his companions. He forgot even the strangeness of the fate that
had sent them wandering through these forbidden regions, like a
bewildered comet that had lost its way. With what a soft sweet light
every star glowed! No matter what its magnitude, the stream that flowed
from it looked calm and holy. No twinkling, no scintillation, no
nictitation, disturbed their pure and lambent gleam. No atmosphere here
interposed its layers of humidity or of unequal density to interrupt the
stately majesty of their effulgence. The longer he gazed upon them, the
more absorbing became their attraction. He felt that they were great
kindly eyes looking down even yet with benevolence and protection on
himself and his companions now driving wildly through space, and lost
in the pathless depths of the black ocean of infinity!

He soon became aware that his friends, following his example, had
interested themselves in gazing at the stars, and were now just as
absorbed as himself in the contemplation of the transcendent spectacle.
For a long time all three continued to feast their eyes on all the
glories of the starry firmament; but, strange to say, the part that
seemed to possess the strangest and weirdest fascination for their
wandering glances was the spot where the vast disc of the Moon showed
like an enormous round hole, black and soundless, and apparently deep
enough to permit a glance into the darkest mysteries of the infinite.

A disagreeable sensation, however, against which they had been for some
time struggling, at last put an end to their contemplations, and
compelled them to think of themselves. This was nothing less than a
pretty sharp cold, at first somewhat endurable, but which soon covered
the inside surface of the window panes with a thick coating of ice. The
fact was that, the Sun's direct rays having no longer an opportunity of
warming up the Projectile, the latter began to lose rapidly by radiation
whatever heat it had stored away within its walls. The consequence was a
very decided falling of the thermometer, and so thick a condensation of
the internal moisture on the window glasses as to soon render all
external observations extremely difficult, if not actually impossible.

The Captain, as the oldest man in the party, claimed the privilege of
saying he could stand it no longer. Striking a light, he consulted the
thermometer and cried out:

"Seventeen degrees below zero, centigrade! that is certainly low enough
to make an old fellow like me feel rather chilly!"

"Just one degree and a half above zero, Fahrenheit!" observed Barbican;
"I really had no idea that it was so cold."

His teeth actually chattered so much that he could hardly articulate;
still he, as well as the others, disliked to entrench on their short
supply of gas.

"One feature of our journey that I particularly admire," said Ardan,
trying to laugh with freezing lips, "is that we can't complain of
monotony. At one time we are frying with the heat and blinded with the
light, like Indians caught on a burning prairie; at another, we are
freezing in the pitchy darkness of a hyperborean winter, like Sir John
Franklin's merry men in the Bay of Boothia. _Madame La Nature_, you
don't forget your devotees; on the contrary, you overwhelm us with your
attentions!"

"Our external temperature may be reckoned at how much?" asked the
Captain, making a desperate effort to keep up the conversation.

"The temperature outside our Projectile must be precisely the same as
that of interstellar space in general," answered Barbican.

"Is not this precisely the moment then," interposed Ardan, quickly,
"for making an experiment which we could never have made as long as we
were in the sunshine?"

"That's so!" exclaimed Barbican; "now or never! I'm glad you thought of
it, Ardan. We are just now in the position to find out the temperature
of space by actual experiment, and so see whose calculations are right,
Fourier's or Pouillet's."

"Let's see," asked Ardan, "who was Fourier, and who was Pouillet?"

"Baron Fourier, of the French Academy, wrote a famous treatise on
_Heat_, which I remember reading twenty years ago in Penington's book
store," promptly responded the Captain; "Pouillet was an eminent
professor of Physics at the Sorbonne, where he died, last year, I
think."

"Thank you, Captain," said Ardan; "the cold does not injure your memory,
though it is decidedly on the advance. See how thick the ice is already
on the window panes! Let it only keep on and we shall soon have our
breaths falling around us in flakes of snow."

"Let us prepare a thermometer," said Barbican, who had already set
himself to work in a business-like manner.

A thermometer of the usual kind, as may be readily supposed, would be of
no use whatever in the experiment that was now about to be made. In an
ordinary thermometer Mercury freezes hard when exposed to a temperature
of 40° below zero. But Barbican had provided himself with a _Minimum_,
_self-recording_ thermometer, of a peculiar nature, invented by
Wolferdin, a friend of Arago's, which could correctly register
exceedingly low degrees of temperature. Before beginning the experiment,
this instrument was tested by comparison with one of the usual kind, and
then Barbican hesitated a few moments regarding the best means of
employing it.

"How shall we start this experiment?" asked the Captain.

"Nothing simpler," answered Ardan, always ready to reply; "you just open
your windows, and fling out your thermometer. It follows your
Projectile, as a calf follows her mother. In a quarter of an hour you
put out your hand--"

"Put out your hand!" interrupted Barbican.

"Put out your hand--" continued Ardan, quietly.

"You do nothing of the kind," again interrupted Barbican; "that is,
unless you prefer, instead of a hand, to pull back a frozen stump,
shapeless, colorless and lifeless!"

"I prefer a hand," said Ardan, surprised and interested.

"Yes," continued Barbican, "the instant your hand left the Projectile,
it would experience the same terrible sensations as is produced by
cauterizing it with an iron bar white hot. For heat, whether rushing
rapidly out of our bodies or rapidly entering them, is identically the
same force and does the same amount of damage. Besides I am by no means
certain that we are still followed by the objects that we flung out of
the Projectile."

"Why not?" asked M'Nicholl; "we saw them all outside not long ago."

"But we can't see them outside now," answered Barbican; "that may be
accounted for, I know, by the darkness, but it may be also by the fact
of their not being there at all. In a case like this, we can't rely on
uncertainties. Therefore, to make sure of not losing our thermometer, we
shall fasten it with a string and easily pull it in whenever we like."

This advice being adopted, the window was opened quickly, and the
instrument was thrown out at once by M'Nicholl, who held it fastened by
a short stout cord so that it could be pulled in immediately. The window
had hardly been open for longer than a second, yet that second had been
enough to admit a terrible icy chill into the interior of the
Projectile.

"Ten thousand ice-bergs!" cried Ardan, shivering all over; "it's cold
enough to freeze a white bear!"

Barbican waited quietly for half an hour; that time he considered quite
long enough to enable the instrument to acquire the temperature of the
interstellar space. Then he gave the signal, and it was instantly pulled
in.

It took him a few moments to calculate the quantity of mercury that had
escaped into the little diaphragm attached to the lower part of the
instrument; then he said:

"A hundred and forty degrees, centigrade, below zero!"

[Illustration: IT'S COLD ENOUGH TO FREEZE A WHITE BEAR.]

"Two hundred and twenty degrees, Fahrenheit, below zero!" cried
M'Nicholl; "no wonder that we should feel a little chilly!"

"Pouillet is right, then," said Barbican, "and Fourier wrong."

"Another victory for Sorbonne over the Academy!" cried Ardan. "_Vive la
Sorbonne!_ Not that I'm a bit proud of finding myself in the midst of a
temperature so very _distingué_--though it is more than three times
colder than Hayes ever felt it at Humboldt Glacier or Nevenoff at
Yakoutsk. If Madame the Moon becomes as cold as this every time that her
surface is withdrawn from the sunlight for fourteen days, I don't think,
boys, that her hospitality is much to hanker after!"




CHAPTER XV.

GLIMPSES AT THE INVISIBLE.


In spite of the dreadful condition in which the three friends now found
themselves, and the still more dreadful future that awaited them, it
must be acknowledged that Ardan bravely kept up his spirits. And his
companions were just as cheerful. Their philosophy was quite simple and
perfectly intelligible. What they could bear, they bore without
murmuring. When it became unbearable, they only complained, if
complaining would do any good. Imprisoned in an iron shroud, flying
through profound darkness into the infinite abysses of space, nearly a
quarter million of miles distant from all human aid, freezing with the
icy cold, their little stock not only of gas but of _air_ rapidly
running lower and lower, a near future of the most impenetrable
obscurity looming up before them, they never once thought of wasting
time in asking such useless questions as where they were going, or what
fate was about to befall them. Knowing that no good could possibly
result from inaction or despair, they carefully kept their wits about
them, making their experiments and recording their observations as
calmly and as deliberately as if they were working at home in the quiet
retirement of their own cabinets.

Any other course of action, however, would have been perfectly absurd
on their part, and this no one knew better than themselves. Even if
desirous to act otherwise, what could they have done? As powerless over
the Projectile as a baby over a locomotive, they could neither clap
brakes to its movement nor switch off its direction. A sailor can turn
his ship's head at pleasure; an aeronaut has little trouble, by means of
his ballast and his throttle-valve, in giving a vertical movement to his
balloon. But nothing of this kind could our travellers attempt. No helm,
or ballast, or throttle-valve could avail them now. Nothing in the world
could be done to prevent things from following their own course to the
bitter end.

If these three men would permit themselves to hazard an expression at
all on the subject, which they didn't, each could have done it by his
own favorite motto, so admirably expressive of his individual nature.
"_Donnez tête baissée!_" (Go it baldheaded!) showed Ardan's
uncalculating impetuosity and his Celtic blood. "_Fata quocunque
vocant!_" (To its logical consequence!) revealed Barbican's
imperturbable stoicism, culture hardening rather than loosening the
original British phlegm. Whilst M'Nicholl's "Screw down the valve and
let her rip!" betrayed at once his unconquerable Yankee coolness and his
old experiences as a Western steamboat captain.

Where were they now, at eight o'clock in the morning of the day called
in America the sixth of December? Near the Moon, very certainly; near
enough, in fact, for them to perceive easily in the dark the great round
screen which she formed between themselves and the Projectile on one
side, and the Earth, Sun, and stars on the other. But as to the exact
distance at which she lay from them--they had no possible means of
calculating it. The Projectile, impelled and maintained by forces
inexplicable and even incomprehensible, had come within less than thirty
miles from the Moon's north pole. But during those two hours of
immersion in the dark shadow, had this distance been increased or
diminished? There was evidently no stand-point whereby to estimate
either the Projectile's direction or its velocity. Perhaps, moving
rapidly away from the Moon, it would be soon out of her shadow
altogether. Perhaps, on the contrary, gradually approaching her surface,
it might come into contact at any moment with some sharp invisible peak
of the Lunar mountains--a catastrophe sure to put a sudden end to the
trip, and the travellers too.

An excited discussion on this subject soon sprang up, in which all
naturally took part. Ardan's imagination as usual getting the better of
his reason, he maintained very warmly that the Projectile, caught and
retained by the Moon's attraction, could not help falling on her
surface, just as an aerolite cannot help falling on our Earth.

"Softly, dear boy, softly," replied Barbican; "aerolites _can_ help
falling on the Earth, and the proof is, that few of them _do_ fall--most
of them don't. Therefore, even granting that we had already assumed the
nature of an aerolite, it does not necessarily follow that we should
fall on the Moon."

"But," objected Ardan, "if we approach only near enough, I don't see how
we can help--"

"You don't see, it may be," said Barbican, "but you can see, if you only
reflect a moment. Have you not often seen the November meteors, for
instance, streaking the skies, thousands at a time?"

"Yes; on several occasions I was so fortunate."

"Well, did you ever see any of them strike the Earth's surface?" asked
Barbican.

"I can't say I ever did," was the candid reply, "but--"

"Well, these shooting stars," continued Barbican, "or rather these
wandering particles of matter, shine only from being inflamed by the
friction of the atmosphere. Therefore they can never be at a greater
distance from the Earth than 30 or 40 miles at furthest, and yet they
seldom fall on it. So with our Projectile. It may go very close to the
Moon without falling into it."

"But our roving Projectile must pull up somewhere in the long run,"
replied Ardan, "and I should like to know where that somewhere can be,
if not in the Moon."

"Softly again, dear boy," said Barbican; "how do you know that our
Projectile must pull up somewhere?"

"It's self-evident," replied Ardan; "it can't keep moving for ever."

"Whether it can or it can't depends altogether on which one of two
mathematical curves it has followed in describing its course. According
to the velocity with which it was endowed at a certain moment, it must
follow either the one or the other; but this velocity I do not consider
myself just now able to calculate."

"Exactly so," chimed in M'Nicholl; "it must describe and keep on
describing either a parabola or a hyperbola."

"Precisely," said Barbican; "at a certain velocity it would take a
parabolic curve; with a velocity considerably greater it should describe
a hyperbolic curve."

"I always did like nice corpulent words," said Ardan, trying to laugh;
"bloated and unwieldy, they express in a neat handy way exactly what you
mean. Of course, I know all about the high--high--those high curves, and
those low curves. No matter. Explain them to me all the same. Consider
me most deplorably ignorant on the nature of these curves."

"Well," said the Captain, a little bumptiously, "a parabola is a curve
of the second order, formed by the intersection of a cone by a plane
parallel to one of its sides."

"You don't say so!" cried Ardan, with mouth agape. "Do tell!"

"It is pretty nearly the path taken by a shell shot from a mortar."

"Well now!" observed Ardan, apparently much surprised; "who'd have
thought it? Now for the high--high--bully old curve!"

"The hyperbola," continued the Captain, not minding Ardan's antics, "the
hyperbola is a curve of the second order, formed from the intersection
of a cone by a plane parallel to its axis, or rather parallel to its two
_generatrices_, constituting two separate branches, extending
indefinitely in both directions."

"Oh, what an accomplished scientist I'm going to turn out, if only left
long enough at your feet, illustrious _maestro_!" cried Ardan, with
effusion. "Only figure it to yourselves, boys; before the Captain's
lucid explanations, I fully expected to hear something about the high
curves and the low curves in the back of an Ancient Thomas! Oh, Michael,
Michael, why didn't you know the Captain earlier?"

But the Captain was now too deeply interested in a hot discussion with
Barbican to notice that the Frenchman was only funning him. Which of the
two curves had been the one most probably taken by the Projectile?
Barbican maintained it was the parabolic; M'Nicholl insisted that it was
the hyperbolic. Their tempers were not improved by the severe cold, and
both became rather excited in the dispute. They drew so many lines on
the table, and crossed them so often with others, that nothing was left
at last but a great blot. They covered bits of paper with _x_'s and
_y_'s, which they read out like so many classic passages, shouting them,
declaiming them, drawing attention to the strong points by gesticulation
so forcible and voice so loud that neither of the disputants could hear
a word that the other said. Possibly the very great difference in
temperature between the external air in contact with their skin and the
blood coursing through their veins, had given rise to magnetic currents
as potential in their effects as a superabundant supply of oxygen. At
all events, the language they soon began to employ in the enforcement of
their arguments fairly made the Frenchman's hair stand on end.

"You probably forget the important difference between a _directrix_ and
an _axis_," hotly observed Barbican.

"I know what an _abscissa_ is, any how!" cried the Captain. "Can you say
as much?"

"Did you ever understand what is meant by a _double ordinate_?" asked
Barbican, trying to keep cool.

"More than you ever did about a _transverse_ and a _conjugate!_" replied
the Captain, with much asperity.

"Any one not convinced at a glance that this _eccentricity_ is equal to
_unity_, must be blind as a bat!" exclaimed Barbican, fast losing his
ordinary urbanity.

"_Less_ than _unity_, you mean! If you want spectacles, here are mine!"
shouted the Captain, angrily tearing them off and offering them to his
adversary.

"Dear boys!" interposed Ardan--

--"The _eccentricity_ is _equal_ to _unity_!" cried Barbican.

--"The _eccentricity_ is _less_ than _unity_!" screamed M'Nicholl.

"Talking of eccentricity--" put in Ardan.

--"Therefore it's a _parabola_, and must be!" cried Barbican,
triumphantly.

--"Therefore it's _hyperbola_ and nothing shorter!" was the Captain's
quite as confident reply.

"For gracious sake!--" resumed Ardan.

"Then produce your _asymptote_!" exclaimed Barbican, with an angry
sneer.

"Let us see the _symmetrical point_!" roared the Captain, quite
savagely.

"Dear boys! old fellows!--" cried Ardan, as loud as his lungs would let
him.

"It's useless to argue with a Mississippi steamboat Captain," ejaculated
Barbican; "he never gives in till he blows up!"

"Never try to convince a Yankee schoolmaster," replied M'Nicholl; "he
has one book by heart and don't believe in any other!"

"Here, friend Michael, get me a cord, won't you? It's the only way to
convince him!" cried Barbican, hastily turning to the Frenchman.

"Hand me over that ruler, Ardan!" yelled the Captain. "The heavy one!
It's the only way now left to bring him to reason!"

"Look here, Barbican and M'Nicholl!" cried Ardan, at last making himself
heard, and keeping a tight hold both on the cord and the ruler. "This
thing has gone far enough! Come. Stop your talk, and answer me a few
questions. What do you want of this cord, Barbican?"

"To describe a parabolic curve!"

"And what are you going to do with the ruler, M'Nicholl!"

"To help draw a true hyperbola!"

"Promise me, Barbican, that you're not going to lasso the Captain!"

"Lasso the Captain! Ha! ha! ha!"

"You promise, M'Nicholl, that you're not going to brain the President!"

"I brain the President! Ho! ho! ho!"

"I want merely to convince him that it is a parabola!"

"I only want to make it clear as day that it is hyperbola!"

"Does it make any real difference whether it is one or the other?"
yelled Ardan.

"The greatest possible difference--in the Eye of Science."

"A radical and incontrovertible difference--in the Eye of Science!"

"Oh! Hang the Eye of Science--will either curve take us to the Moon?"

"No!"

"Will either take us back to the Earth?"

"No!"

"Will either take us anywhere that you know of?"

"No!"

"Why not?"

"Because they are both _open_ curves, and therefore can never end!"

"Is it of the slightest possible importance which of the two curves
controls the Projectile?"

"Not the slightest--except in the Eye of Science!"

"Then let the Eye of Science and her parabolas and hyperbolas, and
conjugates, and asymptotes, and the rest of the confounded nonsensical
farrago, all go to pot! What's the use of bothering your heads about
them here! Have you not enough to trouble you otherwise? A nice pair of
scientists you are? 'Stanislow' scientists, probably. Do _real_
scientists lose their tempers for a trifle? Am I ever to see my ideal of
a true scientific man in the flesh? Barbican came very near realizing my
idea perfectly; but I see that Science just has as little effect as
Culture in driving the Old Adam out of us! The idea of the only
simpleton in the lot having to lecture the others on propriety of
deportment! I thought they were going to tear each other's eyes out! Ha!
Ha! Ha! It's _impayable_! Give me that cord, Michael! Hand me the heavy
ruler, Ardan! It's the only way to bring him to reason! Ho! Ho! Ho! It's
too good! I shall never get over it!" and he laughed till his sides
ached and his cheeks streamed.

His laughter was so contagious, and his merriment so genuine, that there
was really no resisting it, and the next few minutes witnessed nothing
but laughing, and handshaking and rib-punching in the Projectile--though
Heaven knows there was very little for the poor fellows to be merry
about. As they could neither reach the Moon nor return to the Earth,
what _was_ to befall them? The immediate outlook was the very reverse of
exhilarating. If they did not die of hunger, if they did not die of
thirst, the reason would simply be that, in a few days, as soon as their
gas was exhausted, they would die for want of air, unless indeed the icy
cold had killed them beforehand!

By this time, in fact, the temperature had become so exceedingly cold
that a further encroachment on their little stock of gas could be put
off no longer. The light, of course, they could manage to do without;
but a little heat was absolutely necessary to prevent them from freezing
to death. Fortunately, however, the caloric developed by the Reiset and
Regnault process for purifying the air, raised the internal temperature
of the Projectile a little, so that, with an expenditure of gas much
less than they had expected, our travellers were able to maintain it at
a degree capable of sustaining human life.

By this time, also, all observations through the windows had become
exceedingly difficult. The internal moisture condensed so thick and
congealed so hard on the glass that nothing short of continued friction
could keep up its transparency. But this friction, however laborious
they might regard it at other times, they thought very little of just
now, when observation had become far more interesting and important than
ever.

If the Moon had any atmosphere, our travellers were near enough now to
strike any meteor that might be rushing through it. If the Projectile
itself were floating in it, as was possible, would not such a good
conductor of sound convey to their ears the reflexion of some lunar
echo, the roar of some storm raging among the mountains, the rattling of
some plunging avalanche, or the detonations of some eructating volcano?
And suppose some lunar Etna or Vesuvius was flashing out its fires, was
it not even possible that their eye could catch a glimpse of the lurid
gleam? One or two facts of this kind, well attested, would singularly
elucidate the vexatious question of a lunar atmosphere, which is still
so far from being decided. Full of such thoughts and intensely
interested in them, Barbican, M'Nicholl and Ardan, patient as
astronomers at a transit of Venus, watched steadily at their windows,
and allowed nothing worth noticing to escape their searching gaze.

Ardan's patience first gave out. He showed it by an observation natural
enough, for that matter, to a mind unaccustomed to long stretches of
careful thought:

"This darkness is absolutely killing! If we ever take this trip again,
it must be about the time of the New Moon!"

"There I agree with you, Ardan," observed the Captain. "That would be
just the time to start. The Moon herself, I grant, would be lost in the
solar rays and therefore invisible all the time of our trip, but in
compensation, we should have the Full Earth in full view. Besides--and
this is your chief point, no doubt, Ardan--if we should happen to be
drawn round the Moon, just as we are at the present moment, we should
enjoy the inestimable advantage of beholding her invisible side
magnificently illuminated!"

"My idea exactly, Captain," said Ardan. "What is your opinion on this
point, Barbican?"

"My opinion is as follows:" answered Barbican, gravely. "If we ever
repeat this journey, we shall start precisely at the same time and under
precisely the same circumstances. You forget that our only object is to
reach the Moon. Now suppose we had really landed there, as we expected
to do yesterday, would it not have been much more agreeable to behold
the lunar continents enjoying the full light of day than to find them
plunged in the dismal obscurity of night? Would not our first
installation of discovery have been under circumstances decidedly
extremely favorable? Your silence shows that you agree with me. As to
the invisible side, once landed, we should have the power to visit it
when we pleased, and therefore we could always choose whatever time
would best suit our purpose. Therefore, if we wanted to land in the
Moon, the period of the Full Moon was the best period to select. The
period was well chosen, the time was well calculated, the force was well
applied, the Projectile was well aimed, but missing our way spoiled
everything."

"That's sound logic, no doubt," said Ardan; "still I can't help thinking
that all for want of a little light we are losing, probably forever, a
splendid opportunity of seeing the Moon's invisible side. How about the
other planets, Barbican? Do you think that their inhabitants are as
ignorant regarding their satellites as we are regarding ours?"

"On that subject," observed M'Nicholl, "I could venture an answer
myself, though, of course, without pretending to speak dogmatically on
any such open question. The satellites of the other planets, by their
comparative proximity, must be much easier to study than our Moon. The
Saturnians, the Uranians, the Jovians, cannot have had very serious
difficulty in effecting some communication with their satellites.
Jupiter's four moons, for instance, though on an average actually 2-1/2
times farther from their planet's centre than the Moon is from us, are
comparatively four times nearer to him on account of his radius being
eleven times greater than the Earth's. With Saturn's eight moons, the
case is almost precisely similar. Their average distance is nearly three
times greater than that of our Moon; but as Saturn's diameter is about 9
times greater than the Earth's, his bodyguards are really between 3 and
4 times nearer to their principal than ours is to us. As to Uranus, his
first satellite, _Ariel_, half as far from him as our Moon is from the
Earth, is comparatively, though not actually, eight times nearer."

"Therefore," said Barbican, now taking up the subject, "an experiment
analogous to ours, starting from either of these three planets, would
have encountered fewer difficulties. But the whole question resolves
itself into this. _If_ the Jovians and the rest have been able to quit
their planets, they have probably succeeded in discovering the invisible
sides of their satellites. But if they have _not_ been able to do so,
why, they're not a bit wiser than ourselves--But what's the matter with
the Projectile? It's certainly shifting!"

Shifting it certainly was. While the path it described as it swung
blindly through the darkness, could not be laid down by any chart for
want of a starting point, Barbican and his companions soon became aware
of a decided modification of its relative position with regard to the
Moon's surface. Instead of its side, as heretofore, it now presented its
base to the Moon's disc, and its axis had become rigidly vertical to the
lunar horizon. Of this new feature in their journey, Barbican had
assured himself by the most undoubted proof towards four o'clock in the
morning. What was the cause? Gravity, of course. The heavier portion of
the Projectile gravitated towards the Moon's centre exactly as if they
were falling towards her surface.

But _were_ they falling? Were they at last, contrary to all
expectations, about to reach the goal that they had been so ardently
wishing for? No! A sight-point, just discovered by M'Nicholl, very soon
convinced Barbican that the Projectile was as far as ever from
approaching the Moon, but was moving around it in a curve pretty near
concentric.

M'Nicholl's discovery, a luminous gleam flickering on the distant verge
of the black disc, at once engrossed the complete attention of our
travellers and set them to divining its course. It could not possibly be
confounded with a star. Its glare was reddish, like that of a distant
furnace on a dark night; it kept steadily increasing in size and
brightness, thus showing beyond a doubt how the Projectile was
moving--in the direction of the luminous point, and _not_ vertically
falling towards the Moon's surface.

"It's a volcano!" cried the Captain, in great excitement; "a volcano in
full blast! An outlet of the Moon's internal fires! Therefore she can't
be a burnt out cinder!"

"It certainly looks like a volcano," replied Barbican, carefully
investigating this new and puzzling phenomenon with his night-glass. "If
it is not one, in fact, what can it be?"

"To maintain combustion," commenced Ardan syllogistically and
sententiously, "air is necessary. An undoubted case of combustion lies
before us. Therefore, this part of the Moon _must_ have an atmosphere!"

"Perhaps so," observed Barbican, "but not necessarily so. The volcano,
by decomposing certain substances, gunpowder for instance, may be able
to furnish its own oxygen, and thus explode in a vacuum. That blaze, in
fact, seems to me to possess the intensity and the blinding glare of
objects burning in pure oxygen. Let us therefore be not over hasty in
jumping at the conclusion of the existence of a lunar atmosphere."

This fire mountain was situated, according to the most plausible
conjecture, somewhere in the neighborhood of the 45th degree, south
latitude, of the Moon's invisible side. For a little while the
travellers indulged the fond hope that they were directly approaching
it, but, to their great disappointment, the path described by the
Projectile lay in a different direction. Its nature therefore they had
no opportunity of ascertaining. It began to disappear behind the dark
horizon within less than half an hour after the time that M'Nicholl had
signalled it. Still, the fact of the uncontested existence of such a
phenomenon was a grand one, and of considerable importance in
selenographic investigations. It proved that heat had not altogether
disappeared from the lunar world; and the existence of heat once
settled, who can say positively that the vegetable kingdom and even the
animal kingdom have not likewise resisted so far every influence tending
to destroy them? If terrestrial astronomers could only be convinced, by
undoubted evidence, of the existence of this active volcano on the
Moon's surface, they would certainly admit of very considerable
modifications in the present doubts regarding her inhabitability.

Thoughts of this kind continued to occupy the minds of our travellers
even for some time after the little spark of light had been extinguished
in the black gloom. But they said very little; even Ardan was silent,
and continued to look out of the window. Barbican surrendered himself up
to a reverie regarding the mysterious destinies of the lunar world. Was
its present condition a foreshadowing of what our Earth is to become?
M'Nicholl, too, was lost in speculation. Was the Moon older or younger
than the Earth in the order of Creation? Had she ever been a beautiful
world of life, and color, and magnificent variety? If so, had her
inhabitants--

Great Mercy, what a cry from Ardan! It sounded human, so seldom do we
hear a shriek so expressive at once of surprise and horror and even
terror! It brought back his startled companions to their senses in a
second. Nor did they ask him for the cause of his alarm. It was only too
clear. Right in their very path, a blazing ball of fire had suddenly
risen up before their eyes, the pitchy darkness all round it rendering
its glare still more blinding. Its phosphoric coruscation filled the
Projectile with white streams of lurid light, tinging the contents with
a pallor indescribably ghastly. The travellers' faces in particular,
gleamed with that peculiar livid and cadaverous tinge, blue and yellow,
which magicians so readily produce by burning table salt in alcohol.

"_Sacré!_" cried Ardan who always spoke his own language when much
excited. "What a pair of beauties you are! Say, Barbican! What
thundering thing is coming at us now?"

"Another bolide," answered Barbican, his eye as calm as ever, though a
faint tremor was quite perceptible in his voice.

"A bolide? Burning _in vacuo_? You are joking!"

"I was never more in earnest," was the President's quiet reply, as he
looked through his closed fingers.

He knew exactly what he was saying. The dazzling glitter did not deceive
_him_. Such a meteor seen from the Earth could not appear much brighter
than the Full Moon, but here in the midst of the black ether and
unsoftened by the veil of the atmosphere, it was absolutely blinding.
These wandering bodies carry in themselves the principle of their
incandescence. Oxygen is by no means necessary for their combustion.
Some of them indeed often take fire as they rush through the layers of
our atmosphere, and generally burn out before they strike the Earth. But
others, on the contrary, and the greater number too, follow a track
through space far more distant from the Earth than the fifty miles
supposed to limit our atmosphere. In October, 1844, one of these meteors
had appeared in the sky at an altitude calculated to be at least 320
miles; and in August, 1841, another had vanished when it had reached the
height of 450 miles. A few even of those seen from the Earth must have
been several miles in diameter. The velocity with which some of them
have been calculated to move, from east to west, in a direction contrary
to that of the Earth, is astounding enough to exceed belief--about fifty
miles in a second. Our Earth does not move quite 20 miles in a second,
though it goes a thousand times quicker than the fastest locomotive.

[Illustration: THEY COULD UTTER NO WORD.]

Barbican calculated like lightning that the present object of their
alarm was only about 250 miles distant from them, and could not be
less than a mile and a quarter in diameter. It was coming on at the rate
of more than a mile a second or about 75 miles a minute. It lay right in
the path of the Projectile, and in a very few seconds indeed a terrible
collision was inevitable. The enormous rate at which it grew in size,
showed the terrible velocity at which it was approaching.

You can hardly imagine the situation of our poor travellers at the sight
of this frightful apparition. I shall certainly not attempt to describe
it. In spite of their singular courage, wonderful coolness,
extraordinary fortitude, they were now breathless, motionless, almost
helpless; their muscles were tightened to their utmost tension; their
eyes stared out of their sockets; their faces were petrified with
horror. No wonder. Their Projectile, whose course they were powerless as
children to guide, was making straight for this fiery mass, whose glare
in a few seconds had become more blinding than the open vent of a
reverberating furnace. Their own Projectile was carrying them headlong
into a bottomless abyss of fire!

Still, even in this moment of horror, their presence of mind, or at
least their consciousness, never abandoned them. Barbican had grasped
each of his friends by the hand, and all three tried as well as they
could to watch through half-closed eyelids the white-hot asteroid's
rapid approach. They could utter no word, they could breathe no prayer.
They gave themselves up for lost--in the agony of terror that partially
interrupted the ordinary functions of their brains, this was absolutely
all they could do! Hardly three minutes had elapsed since Ardan had
caught the first glimpse of it--three ages of agony! Now it was on them!
In a second--in less than a second, the terrible fireball had burst like
a shell! Thousands of glittering fragments were flying around them in
all directions--but with no more noise than is made by so many light
flakes of thistle-down floating about some warm afternoon in summer. The
blinding, blasting steely white glare of the explosion almost bereft the
travellers of the use of their eyesight forever, but no more report
reached their ears than if it had taken place at the bottom of the Gulf
of Mexico. In an atmosphere like ours, such a crash would have burst the
ear-membranes of ten thousand elephants!

In the middle of the commotion another loud cry was suddenly heard. It
was the Captain who called this time. His companions rushed to his
window and all looked out together in the same direction.

What a sight met their eyes! What pen can describe it? What pencil can
reproduce the magnificence of its coloring? It was a Vesuvius at his
best and wildest, at the moment just after the old cone has fallen in.
Millions of luminous fragments streaked the sky with their blazing
fires. All sizes and shapes of light, all colors and shades of colors,
were inextricably mingled together. Irradiations in gold, scintillations
in crimson, splendors in emerald, lucidities in ultramarine--a dazzling
girandola of every tint and of every hue. Of the enormous fireball, an
instant ago such an object of dread, nothing now remained but these
glittering pieces, shooting about in all directions, each one an
asteroid in its turn. Some flew out straight and gleaming like a steel
sword; others rushed here and there irregularly like chips struck off a
red-hot rock; and others left long trails of glittering cosmical dust
behind them like the nebulous tail of Donati's comet.

These incandescent blocks crossed each other, struck each other, crushed
each other into still smaller fragments, one of which, grazing the
Projectile, jarred it so violently that the very window at which the
travellers were standing, was cracked by the shock. Our friends felt, in
fact, as if they were the objective point at which endless volleys of
blazing shells were aimed, any of them powerful enough, if it only hit
them fair, to make as short work of the Projectile as you could of an
egg-shell. They had many hairbreadth escapes, but fortunately the
cracking of the glass proved to be the only serious damage of which they
could complain.

This extraordinary illumination lasted altogether only a few seconds;
every one of its details was of a most singular and exciting nature--but
one of its greatest wonders was yet to come. The ether, saturated with
luminous matter, developed an intensity of blazing brightness unequalled
by the lime light, the magnesium light, the electric light, or any other
dazzling source of illumination with which we are acquainted on earth.
It flashed out of these asteroids in all directions, and downwards, of
course, as well as elsewhere. At one particular instant, it was so very
vivid that Ardan, who happened to be looking downwards, cried out, as if
in transport:

"Oh!! The Moon! Visible at last!"

And the three companions, thrilling with indescribable emotion, shot a
hasty glance through the openings of the coruscating field beneath them.
Did they really catch a glimpse of the mysterious invisible disc that
the eye of man had never before lit upon? For a second or so they gazed
with enraptured fascination at all they could see. What did they see,
what could they see at a distance so uncertain that Barbican has never
been able even to guess at it? Not much. Ardan was reminded of the night
he had stood on the battlements of Dover Castle, a few years before,
when the fitful flashes of a thunder storm gave him occasional and very
uncertain glimpses of the French coast at the opposite side of the
strait. Misty strips long and narrow, extending over one portion of the
disc--probably cloud-scuds sustained by a highly rarefied
atmosphere--permitted only a very dreamy idea of lofty mountains
stretching beneath them in shapeless proportions, of smaller reliefs,
circuses, yawning craters, and the other capricious, sponge-like
formations so common on the visible side. Elsewhere the watchers became
aware for an instant of immense spaces, certainly not arid plains, but
seas, real oceans, vast and calm, reflecting from their placid depths
the dazzling fireworks of the weird and wildly flashing meteors.
Farther on, but very darkly as if behind a screen, shadowy continents
revealed themselves, their surfaces flecked with black cloudy masses,
probably great forests, with here and there a--

Nothing more! In less than a second the illumination had come to an end,
involving everything in the Moon's direction once more in pitchy
darkness.

But had the impression made on the travellers' eyes been a mere vision
or the result of a reality? an optical delusion or the shadow of a solid
fact? Could an observation so rapid, so fleeting, so superficial, be
really regarded as a genuine scientific affirmation? Could such a feeble
glimmer of the invisible disc justify them in pronouncing a decided
opinion on the inhabitability of the Moon? To such questions as these,
rising spontaneously and simultaneously in the minds of our travellers,
they could not reply at the moment; they could not reply to them long
afterwards; even to this day they can give them no satisfactory answer.
All they could do at the moment, they did. To every sight and sound they
kept their eyes and ears open, and, by observing the most perfect
silence, they sought to render their impressions too vivid to admit of
deception.

There was now, however, nothing to be heard, and very little more to be
seen. The few coruscations that flashed over the sky, gradually became
fewer and dimmer; the asteroids sought paths further and further apart,
and finally disappeared altogether. The ether resumed its original
blackness. The stars, eclipsed for a moment, blazed out again on the
firmament, and the invisible disc, that had flashed into view for an
instant, once more relapsed forever into the impenetrable depths of
night.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE.


Exceedingly narrow and exceedingly fortunate had been the escape of the
Projectile. And from a danger too the most unlikely and the most
unexpected. Who would have ever dreamed of even the possibility of such
an encounter? And was all danger over? The sight of one of these erratic
bolides certainly justified the gravest apprehensions of our travellers
regarding the existence of others. Worse than the sunken reefs of the
Southern Seas or the snags of the Mississippi, how could the Projectile
be expected to avoid them? Drifting along blindly through the boundless
ethereal ocean, _her_ inmates, even if they saw the danger, were totally
powerless to turn her aside. Like a ship without a rudder, like a
runaway horse, like a collapsed balloon, like an iceberg in an Atlantic
storm, like a boat in the Niagara rapids, she moved on sullenly,
recklessly, mechanically, mayhap into the very jaws of the most
frightful danger, the bright intelligences within no more able to modify
her motions even by a finger's breadth than they were able to affect
Mercury's movements around the Sun.

But did our friends complain of the new perils now looming up before
them? They never thought of such a thing. On the contrary, they only
considered themselves (after the lapse of a few minutes to calm their
nerves) extremely lucky in having witnessed this fresh glory of
exuberant nature, this transcendent display of fireworks which not only
cast into absolute insignificance anything of the kind they had ever
seen on Earth, but had actually enabled them by its dazzling
illumination to gaze for a second or two at the Moon's mysterious
invisible disc. This glorious momentary glance, worth a whole lifetime
of ordinary existence, had revealed to mortal ken her continents, her
oceans, her forests. But did it also convince them of the existence of
an atmosphere on her surface whose vivifying molecules would render
_life_ possible? This question they had again to leave unanswered--it
will hardly ever be answered in a way quite satisfactory to human
curiosity. Still, infinite was their satisfaction at having hovered even
for an instant on the very verge of such a great problem's solution.

It was now half-past three in the afternoon. The Projectile still
pursued its curving but otherwise unknown path over the Moon's invisible
face. Had this path been disturbed by that dangerous meteor? There was
every reason to fear so--though, disturbance or no disturbance, the
curve it described should still be one strictly in accordance with the
laws of Mechanical Philosophy. Whether it was a parabola or a hyperbola,
however, or whether it was disturbed or not, made very little difference
as, in any case, the Projectile was bound to quit pretty soon the cone
of the shadow, at a point directly opposite to where it had entered it.
This cone could not possibly be of very great extent, considering the
very slight ratio borne by the Moon's diameter when compared with the
Sun's. Still, to all appearances, the Projectile seemed to be quite as
deeply immersed in the shadow as ever, and there was apparently not the
slightest sign of such a state of things coming soon to an end. At what
rate was the Projectile now moving? Hard to say, but certainly not
slowly, certainly rapidly enough to be out of the shadow by this time,
if describing a curve rigidly parabolic. Was the curve therefore _not_
parabolic? Another puzzling problem and sadly bewildering to poor
Barbican, who had now almost lost his reason by attempting to clear up
questions that were proving altogether too profound for his overworked
brains.

Not that he ever thought of taking rest. Not that his companions thought
of taking rest. Far from it. With senses as high-strung as ever, they
still watched carefully for every new fact, every unexpected incident
that might throw some light on the sidereal investigations. Even their
dinner, or what was called so, consisted of only a few bits of bread and
meat, distributed by Ardan at five o'clock, and swallowed mechanically.
They did not even turn on the gas full head to see what they were
eating; each man stood solidly at his window, the glass of which they
had enough to do in keeping free from the rapidly condensing moisture.

At about half-past five, however, M'Nicholl, who had been gazing for
some time with his telescope in a particular direction, called the
attention of his companions to some bright specks of light barely
discernible in that part of the horizon towards which the Projectile was
evidently moving. His words were hardly uttered when his companions
announced the same discovery. They could soon all see the glittering
specks not only becoming more and more numerous, but also gradually
assuming the shape of an extremely slender, but extremely brilliant
crescent. Rapidly more brilliant and more decided in shape the profile
gradually grew, till it soon resembled the first faint sketch of the New
Moon that we catch of evenings in the western sky, or rather the first
glimpse we get of her limb as it slowly moves out of eclipse. But it was
inconceivably brighter than either, and was furthermore strangely
relieved by the pitchy blackness both of sky and Moon. In fact, it soon
became so brilliant as to dispel in a moment all doubt as to its
particular nature. No meteor could present such a perfect shape; no
volcano, such dazzling splendor.

"The Sun!" cried Barbican.

"The Sun?" asked M'Nicholl and Ardan in some astonishment.

"Yes, dear friends; it is the Sun himself that you now see; these
summits that you behold him gilding are the mountains that lie on the
Moon's southern rim. We are rapidly nearing her south pole."

"After doubling her north pole!" cried Ardan; "why, we must be
circumnavigating her!"

"Exactly; sailing all around her."

"Hurrah! Then we're all right at last! There's nothing more to fear from
your hyperbolas or parabolas or any other of your open curves!"

"Nothing more, certainly, from an open curve, but every thing from a
closed one."

"A closed curve! What is it called? And what is the trouble?"

"An eclipse it is called; and the trouble is that, instead of flying off
into the boundless regions of space, our Projectile will probably
describe an elliptical orbit around the Moon--"

--"What!" cried M'Nicholl, in amazement, "and be her satellite for
ever!"

"All right and proper," said Ardan; "why shouldn't she have one of her
own?"

"Only, my dear friend," said Barbican to Ardan, "this change of curve
involves no change in the doom of the Projectile. We are as infallibly
lost by an ellipse as by a parabola."

"Well, there was one thing I never could reconcile myself to in the
whole arrangement," replied Ardan cheerfully; "and that was destruction
by an open curve. Safe from that, I could say, 'Fate, do your worst!'
Besides, I don't believe in the infallibility of your ellipsic. It may
prove just as unreliable as the hyperbola. And it is no harm to hope
that it may!"

From present appearances there was very little to justify Ardan's hope.
Barbican's theory of the elliptic orbit was unfortunately too well
grounded to allow a single reasonable doubt to be expressed regarding
the Projectile's fate. It was to gravitate for ever around the Moon--a
sub-satellite. It was a new born individual in the astral universe, a
microcosm, a little world in itself, containing, however, only three
inhabitants and even these destined to perish pretty soon for want of
air. Our travellers, therefore, had no particular reason for rejoicing
over the new destiny reserved for the Projectile in obedience to the
inexorable laws of the centripetal and centrifugal forces. They were
soon, it is true, to have the opportunity of beholding once more the
illuminated face of the Moon. They might even live long enough to catch
a last glimpse of the distant Earth bathed in the glory of the solar
rays. They might even have strength enough left to be able to chant one
solemn final eternal adieu to their dear old Mother World, upon whose
features their mortal eyes should never again rest in love and longing!
Then, what was their Projectile to become? An inert, lifeless, extinct
mass, not a particle better than the most defunct asteroid that wanders
blindly through the fields of ether. A gloomy fate to look forward to.
Yet, instead of grieving over the inevitable, our bold travellers
actually felt thrilled with delight at the prospect of even a momentary
deliverance from those gloomy depths of darkness and of once more
finding themselves, even if only for a few hours, in the cheerful
precincts illuminated by the genial light of the blessed Sun!

The ring of light, in the meantime, becoming brighter and brighter,
Barbican was not long in discovering and pointing out to his companions
the different mountains that lay around the Moon's south pole.

"There is _Leibnitz_ on your right," said he, "and on your left you can
easily see the peaks of _Doerfel_. Belonging rather to the Moon's dark
side than to her Earth side, they are visible to terrestrial astronomers
only when she is in her highest northern latitudes. Those faint peaks
beyond them that you can catch with such difficulty must be those of
_Newton_ and _Curtius_."

"How in the world can you tell?" asked Ardan.

"They are the highest mountains in the circumpolar regions," replied
Barbican. "They have been measured with the greatest care; _Newton_ is
23,000 feet high."

"More or less!" laughed Ardan. "What Delphic oracle says so?"

"Dear friend," replied Barbican quietly, "the visible mountains of the
Moon have been measured so carefully and so accurately that I should
hardly hesitate in affirming their altitude to be as well known as that
of Mont Blanc, or, at least, as those of the chief peaks in the
Himalayahs or the Rocky Mountain Range."

"I should like to know how people set about it," observed Ardan
incredulously.

"There are several well known methods of approaching this problem,"
replied Barbican; "and as these methods, though founded on different
principles, bring us constantly to the same result, we may pretty
safely conclude that our calculations are right. We have no time, just
now to draw diagrams, but, if I express myself clearly, you will no
doubt easily catch the general principle."

"Go ahead!" answered Ardan. "Anything but Algebra."

"We want no Algebra now," said Barbican, "It can't enable us to find
principles, though it certainly enables us to apply them. Well. The Sun
at a certain altitude shines on one side of a mountain and flings a
shadow on the other. The length of this shadow is easily found by means
of a telescope, whose object glass is provided with a micrometer. This
consists simply of two parallel spider threads, one of which is
stationary and the other movable. The Moon's real diameter being known
and occupying a certain space on the object glass, the exact space
occupied by the shadow can be easily ascertained by means of the movable
thread. This space, compared with the Moon's space, will give us the
length of the shadow. Now, as under the same circumstances a certain
height can cast only a certain shadow, of course a knowledge of the one
must give you that of the other, and _vice versa_. This method, stated
roughly, was that followed by Galileo, and, in our own day, by Beer and
Maedler, with extraordinary success."

"I certainly see some sense in this method," said Ardan, "if they took
extraordinary pains to observe correctly. The least carelessness would
set them wrong, not only by feet but by miles. We have time enough,
however, to listen to another method before we get into the full blaze
of the glorious old Sol."

"The other method," interrupted M'Nicholl laying down his telescope to
rest his eyes, and now joining in the conversation to give himself
something to do, "is called that of the _tangent rays_. A solar ray,
barely passing the edge of the Moon's surface, is caught on the peak of
a mountain the rest of which lies in shadow. The distance between this
starry peak and the line separating the light from the darkness, we
measure carefully by means of our telescope. Then--"

"I see it at a glance!" interrupted Ardan with lighting eye; "the ray,
being a tangent, of course makes right angles with the radius, which is
known: consequently we have two sides and one angle--quite enough to
find the other parts of the triangle. Very ingenious--but now, that I
think of it--is not this method absolutely impracticable for every
mountain except those in the immediate neighborhood of the light and
shadow line?"

"That's a defect easily remedied by patience," explained Barbican--the
Captain, who did not like being interrupted, having withdrawn to his
telescope--"As this line is continually changing, in course of time all
the mountains must come near it. A third method--to measure the mountain
profile directly by means of the micrometer--is evidently applicable
only to altitudes lying exactly on the lunar rim."

"That is clear enough," said Ardan, "and another point is also very
clear. In Full Moon no measurement is possible. When no shadows are
made, none can be measured. Measurements, right or wrong, are possible
only when the solar rays strike the Moon's surface obliquely with regard
to the observer. Am I right, Signor Barbicani, maestro illustrissimo?"

"Perfectly right," replied Barbican. "You are an apt pupil."

"Say that again," said Ardan. "I want Mac to hear it."

Barbican humored him by repeating the observation, but M'Nicholl would
only notice it by a grunt of doubtful meaning.

"Was Galileo tolerably successful in his calculations?" asked Ardan,
resuming the conversation.

Before answering this question, Barbican unrolled the map of the Moon,
which a faint light like that of day-break now enabled him to examine.
He then went on: "Galileo was wonderfully successful--considering that
the telescope which he employed was a poor instrument of his own
construction, magnifying only thirty times. He gave the lunar mountains
a height of about 26,000 feet--an altitude cut down by Hevelius, but
almost doubled by Riccioli. Herschel was the first to come pretty close
to the truth, but Beer and Maedler, whose _Mappa Selenographica_ now
lies before us, have left really nothing more to be done for lunar
astronomy--except, of course, to pay a personal visit to the
Moon--which we have tried to do, but I fear with a very poor prospect of
success."

"Cheer up! cheer up!" cried Ardan. "It's not all over yet by long odds.
Who can say what is still in store for us? Another bolide may shunt us
off our ellipse and even send us to the Moon's surface."

Then seeing Barbican shake his head ominously and his countenance become
more and more depressed, this true friend tried to brighten him up a bit
by feigning to take deep interest in a subject that to him was
absolutely the driest in the world.

"Meer and Baedler--I mean Beer and Maedler," he went on, "must have
measured at least forty or fifty mountains to their satisfaction."

"Forty or fifty!" exclaimed Barbican. "They measured no fewer than a
thousand and ninety-five lunar mountains and crater summits with a
perfect success. Six of these reach an altitude of upwards of 18,000
feet, and twenty-two are more than 15,000 feet high."

"Which is the highest in the lot?" asked Ardan, keenly relishing
Barbican's earnestness.

"_Doerfel_ in the southern hemisphere, the peak of which I have just
pointed out, is the highest of the lunar mountains so far measured,"
replied Barbican. "It is nearly 25,000 feet high."

"Indeed! Five thousand feet lower than Mount Everest--still for a lunar
mountain, it is quite a respectable altitude."

"Respectable! Why it's an enormous altitude, my dear friend, if you
compare it with the Moon's diameter. The Earth's diameter being more
than 3-1/2 times greater than the Moon's, if the Earth's mountains bore
the same ratio to those of the Moon, Everest should be more than sixteen
miles high, whereas it is not quite six."

"How do the general heights of the Himalayahs compare with those of the
highest lunar mountains?" asked Ardan, wondering what would be his next
question.

"Fifteen peaks in the eastern or higher division of the Himalayahs, are
higher than the loftiest lunar peaks," replied Barbican. "Even in the
western, or lower section of the Himalayahs, some of the peaks exceed
_Doerfel_."

"Which are the chief lunar mountains that exceed Mont Blanc in
altitude?" asked Ardan, bravely suppressing a yawn.

"The following dozen, ranged, if my memory does not fail me, in the
exact order of their respective heights;" replied Barbican, never
wearied in answering such questions: "_Newton_, _Curtius_, _Casatus_,
_Rheita_, _Short_, _Huyghens_, _Biancanus_, _Tycho_, _Kircher_,
_Clavius_, _Endymion_, and _Catharina_."

"Now those not quite up to Mont Blanc?" asked Ardan, hardly knowing what
to say.

"Here they are, about half a dozen of them: _Moretus_, _Theophilus_,
_Harpalus_, _Eratosthenes_, _Werner_, and _Piccolomini_," answered
Barbican as ready as a schoolboy reciting his lesson, and pointing them
out on the map as quickly as a compositor distributing his type.

"The next in rank?" asked Ardan, astounded at his friend's wonderful
memory.

"The next in rank," replied Barbican promptly, "are those about the size
of the Matterhorn, that is to say about 2-3/4 miles in height. They are
_Macrobius_, _Delambre_, and _Conon_. Come," he added, seeing Ardan
hesitating and at a loss what other question to ask, "don't you want to
know what lunar mountains are about the same height as the Peak of
Teneriffe? or as Ætna? or as Mount Washington? You need not be afraid of
puzzling me. I studied up the subject thoroughly, and therefore know all
about it."

"Oh! I could listen to you with delight all day long!" cried Ardan,
enthusiastically, though with some embarrassment, for he felt a twinge
of conscience in acting so falsely towards his beloved friend. "The fact
is," he went on, "such a rational conversation as the present, on such
an absorbing subject, with such a perfect master--"

"The Sun!" cried M'Nicholl starting up and cheering. "He's cleared the
disc completely, and he's now himself again! Long life to him! Hurrah!"

"Hurrah!" cried the others quite as enthusiastically (Ardan did not seem
a bit desirous to finish his sentence).

They tossed their maps aside and hastened to the window.




CHAPTER XVII.

TYCHO.


It was now exactly six o'clock in the evening. The Sun, completely clear
of all contact with the lunar disc, steeped the whole Projectile in his
golden rays. The travellers, vertically over the Moon's south pole,
were, as Barbican soon ascertained, about 30 miles distant from it, the
exact distance they had been from the north pole--a proof that the
elliptic curve still maintained itself with mathematical rigor.

For some time, the travellers' whole attention was concentrated on the
glorious Sun. His light was inexpressibly cheering; and his heat, soon
penetrating the walls of the Projectile, infused a new and sweet life
into their chilled and exhausted frames. The ice rapidly disappeared,
and the windows soon resumed their former perfect transparency.

"Oh! how good the pleasant sunlight is!" cried the Captain, sinking on a
seat in a quiet ecstasy of enjoyment. "How I pity Ardan's poor friends
the Selenites during that night so long and so icy! How impatient they
must be to see the Sun back again!"

"Yes," said Ardan, also sitting down the better to bask in the vivifying
rays, "his light no doubt brings them to life and keeps them alive.
Without light or heat during all that dreary winter, they must freeze
stiff like the frogs or become torpid like the bears. I can't imagine
how they could get through it otherwise."

"I'm glad _we're_ through it anyhow," observed M'Nicholl. "I may at once
acknowledge that I felt perfectly miserable as long as it lasted. I can
now easily understand how the combined cold and darkness killed Doctor
Kane's Esquimaux dogs. It was near killing me. I was so miserable that
at last I could neither talk myself nor bear to hear others talk."

"My own case exactly," said Barbican--"that is," he added hastily,
correcting himself, "I tried to talk because I found Ardan so
interested, but in spite of all we said, and saw, and had to think of,
Byron's terrible dream would continually rise up before me:

    "The bright Sun was extinguished, and the Stars
    Wandered all darkling in the eternal space,
    Rayless and pathless, and the icy Earth
    Swung blind and blackening in the Moonless air.
    Morn came and went, and came and brought no day!
    And men forgot their passions in the dread
    Of this their desolation, and all hearts
    Were chilled into a selfish prayer for _light_!"

As he pronounced these words in accents at once monotonous and
melancholy, Ardan, fully appreciative, quietly gesticulated in perfect
cadence with the rhythm. Then the three men remained completely silent
for several minutes. Buried in recollection, or lost in thought, or
magnetized by the bright Sun, they seemed to be half asleep while
steeping their limbs in his vitalizing beams.

Barbican was the first to dissolve the reverie by jumping up. His sharp
eye had noticed that the base of the Projectile, instead of keeping
rigidly perpendicular to the lunar surface, turned away a little, so as
to render the elliptical orbit somewhat elongated. This he made his
companions immediately observe, and also called their attention to the
fact that from this point they could easily have seen the Earth had it
been Full, but that now, drowned in the Sun's beams, it was quite
invisible. A more attractive spectacle, however, soon engaged their
undivided attention--that of the Moon's southern regions, now brought
within about the third of a mile by their telescopes. Immediately
resuming their posts by the windows, they carefully noted every feature
presented by the fantastic panorama that stretched itself out in endless
lengths beneath their wondering eyes.

[Illustration: THEY SEEMED HALF ASLEEP.]

Mount _Leibnitz_ and Mount _Doerfel_ form two separate groups developed
in the regions of the extreme south. The first extends westwardly from
the pole to the 84th parallel; the second, on the southeastern border,
starting from the pole, reaches the neighborhood of the 65th. In the
entangled valleys of their clustered peaks, appeared the dazzling sheets
of white, noted by Father Secchi, but their peculiar nature Barbican
could now examine with a greater prospect of certainty than the
illustrious Roman astronomer had ever enjoyed.

"They're beds of snow," he said at last in a decided tone.

"Snow!" exclaimed M'Nicholl.

"Yes, snow, or rather glaciers heavily coated with glittering ice. See
how vividly they reflect the Sun's rays. Consolidated beds of lava could
never shine with such dazzling uniformity. Therefore there must be both
water and air on the Moon's surface. Not much--perhaps very little if
you insist on it--but the fact that there is some can now no longer be
questioned."

This assertion of Barbican's, made so positively by a man who never
decided unless when thoroughly convinced, was a great triumph for Ardan,
who, as the gracious reader doubtless remembers, had had a famous
dispute with M'Nicholl on that very subject at Tampa.[D] His eyes
brightened and a smile of pleasure played around his lips, but, with a
great effort at self-restraint, he kept perfectly silent and would not
permit himself even to look in the direction of the Captain. As for
M'Nicholl, he was apparently too much absorbed in _Doerfel_ and
_Leibnitz_ to mind anything else.

These mountains rose from plains of moderate extent, bounded by an
indefinite succession of walled hollows and ring ramparts. They are the
only chains met in this region of ridge-brimmed craters and circles;
distinguished by no particular feature, they project a few pointed peaks
here and there, some of which exceed four miles and a half in height.
This altitude, however, foreshortened as it was by the vertical position
of the Projectile, could not be noticed just then, even if correct
observation had been permitted by the dazzling surface.

Once more again before the travellers' eyes the Moon's disc revealed
itself in all the old familiar features so characteristic of lunar
landscapes--no blending of tones, no softening of colors, no graduation
of shadows, every line glaring in white or black by reason of the total
absence of refracted light. And yet the wonderfully peculiar character
of this desolate world imparted to it a weird attraction as strangely
fascinating as ever.

Over this chaotic region the travellers were now sweeping, as if borne
on the wings of a storm; the peaks defiled beneath them; the yawning
chasms revealed their ruin-strewn floors; the fissured cracks untwisted
themselves; the ramparts showed all their sides; the mysterious holes
presented their impenetrable depths; the clustered mountain summits and
rings rapidly decomposed themselves: but in a moment again all had
become more inextricably entangled than ever. Everything appeared to be
the finished handiwork of volcanic agency, in the utmost purity and
highest perfection. None of the mollifying effects of air or water could
here be noticed. No smooth-capped mountains, no gently winding river
channels, no vast prairie-lands of deposited sediment, no traces of
vegetation, no signs of agriculture, no vestiges of a great city.
Nothing but vast beds of glistering lava, now rough like immense piles
of scoriae and clinker, now smooth like crystal mirrors, and reflecting
the Sun's rays with the same intolerable glare. Not the faintest speck
of life. A world absolutely and completely dead, fixed, still,
motionless--save when a gigantic land-slide, breaking off the vertical
wall of a crater, plunged down into the soundless depths, with all the
fury too of a crashing avalanche, with all the speed of a Niagara, but,
in the total absence of atmosphere, noiseless as a feather, as a snow
flake, as a grain of impalpable dust.

Careful observations, taken by Barbican and repeated by his companions,
soon satisfied them that the ridgy outline of the mountains on the
Moon's border, though perhaps due to different forces from those acting
in the centre, still presented a character generally uniform. The same
bulwark-surrounded hollows, the same abrupt projections of surface. Yet
a different arrangement, as Barbican pointed out to his companions,
might be naturally expected. In the central portion of the disc, the
Moon's crust, before solidification, must have been subjected to two
attractions--that of the Moon herself and that of the Earth--acting,
however, in contrary directions and therefore, in a certain sense,
serving to neutralize each other. Towards the border of her disc, on the
contrary, the terrestrial attraction, having acted in a direction
perpendicular to that of the lunar, should have exerted greater power,
and therefore given a different shape to the general contour. But no
remarkable difference had so far been perceived by terrestrial
observers; and none could now be detected by our travellers. Therefore
the Moon must have found in herself alone the principle of her shape and
of her superficial development--that is, she owed nothing to external
influences. "Arago was perfectly right, therefore," concluded Barbican,
"in the remarkable opinion to which he gave expression thirty years ago:

'No external action whatever has contributed to the formation of the
Moon's diversified surface.'"

"But don't you think, Barbican," asked the Captain, "that every force,
internal or external, that might modify the Moon's shape, has ceased
long ago?"

"I am rather inclined to that opinion," said Barbican; "it is not,
however, a new one. Descartes maintained that as the Earth is an extinct
Sun, so is the Moon an extinct Earth. My own opinion at present is that
the Moon is now the image of death, but I can't say if she has ever been
the abode of life."

"The abode of life!" cried Ardan, who had great repugnance in accepting
the idea that the Moon was no better than a heap of cinders and ashes;
"why, look there! If those are not as neat a set of the ruins of an
abandoned city as ever I saw, I should like to know what they are!"

[Illustration: ONCE MORE THE PIPES OF AN AQUEDUCT.]

He pointed to some very remarkable rocky formations in the
neighborhood of _Short_, a ring mountain rising to an altitude
considerably higher than that of Mont Blanc. Even Barbican and M'Nicholl
could detect some regularity and semblance of order in the arrangement
of these rocks, but this, of course, they looked on as a mere freak of
nature, like the Lurlei Rock, the Giant's Causeway, or the Old Man of
the Franconia Mountains. Ardan, however, would not accept such an easy
mode of getting rid of a difficulty.

"See the ruins on that bluff," he exclaimed; "those steep sides must
have been washed by a great river in the prehistoric times. That was the
fortress. Farther down lay the city. There are the dismantled ramparts;
why, there's the very coping of a portico still intact! Don't you see
three broken pillars lying beside their pedestals? There! a little to
the left of those arches that evidently once bore the pipes of an
aqueduct! You don't see them? Well, look a little to the right, and
there is something that you can see! As I'm a living man I have no
difficulty in discerning the gigantic butments of a great bridge that
formerly spanned that immense river!"

Did he really see all this? To this day he affirms stoutly that he did,
and even greater wonders besides. His companions, however, without
denying that he had good grounds for his assertion on this subject or
questioning the general accuracy of his observations, content themselves
with saying that the reason why they had failed to discover the
wonderful city, was that Ardan's telescope was of a strange and
peculiar construction. Being somewhat short-sighted, he had had it
manufactured expressly for his own use, but it was of such singular
power that his companions could not use it without hurting their eyes.

But, whether the ruins were real or not, the moments were evidently too
precious to be lost in idle discussion. The great city of the Selenites
soon disappeared on the remote horizon, and, what was of far greater
importance, the distance of the Projectile from the Moon's disc began to
increase so sensibly that the smaller details of the surface were soon
lost in a confused mass, and it was only the lofty heights, the wide
craters, the great ring mountains, and the vast plains that still
continued to give sharp, distinctive outlines.

A little to their left, the travellers could now plainly distinguish one
of the most remarkable of the Moon's craters, _Newton_, so well known to
all lunar astronomers. Its ramparts, forming a perfect circle, rise to
such a height, at least 22,000 feet, as to seem insurmountable.

"You can, no doubt, notice for yourselves," said Barbican, "that the
external height of this mountain is far from being equal to the depth of
its crater. The enormous pit, in fact, seems to be a soundless sea of
pitchy black, the bottom of which the Sun's rays have never reached.
There, as Humboldt says, reigns eternal darkness, so absolute that
Earth-shine or even Sunlight is never able to dispel it. Had Michael's
friends the old mythologists ever known anything about it, they would
doubtless have made it the entrance to the infernal regions. On the
whole surface of our Earth, there is no mountain even remotely
resembling it. It is a perfect type of the lunar crater. Like most of
them, it shows that the peculiar formation of the Moon's surface is due,
first, to the cooling of the lunar crust; secondly, to the cracking from
internal pressure; and, thirdly, to the violent volcanic action in
consequence. This must have been of a far fiercer nature than it has
ever been with us. The matter was ejected to a vast height till great
mountains were formed; and still the action went on, until at last the
floor of the crater sank to a depth far lower than the level of the
external plain."

"You may be right," said Ardan by way of reply; "as for me, I'm looking
out for another city. But I'm sorry to say that our Projectile is
increasing its distance so fast that, even if one lay at my feet at this
moment, I doubt very much if I could see it a bit better than either you
or the Captain."

_Newton_ was soon passed, and the Projectile followed a course that took
it directly over the ring mountain _Moretus_. A little to the west the
travellers could easily distinguish the summits of _Blancanus_, 7,000
feet high, and, towards seven o'clock in the evening, they were
approaching the neighborhood of _Clavius_.

This walled-plain, one of the most remarkable on the Moon, lies 55° S.
by 15° E. Its height is estimated at 16,000 feet, but it is considered
to be about a hundred and fifty miles in diameter. Of this vast crater,
the travellers now at a distance of 250 miles, reduced to 2-1/2 by their
telescopes, had a magnificent bird's-eye view.

"Our terrestrial volcanoes," said Barbican, "as you can now readily
judge for yourselves, are no more than molehills when compared with
those of the Moon. Measure the old craters formed by the early eruptions
of Vesuvius and Ætna, and you will find them little more than three
miles in diameter. The crater of Cantal in central France is only about
six miles in width; the famous valley in Ceylon, called the _Crater_,
though not at all due to volcanic action, is 44 miles across and is
considered to be the greatest in the world. But even this is very little
in comparison to the diameter of _Clavius_ lying beneath us at the
present moment."

"How much is its diameter?" asked the Captain.

"At least one hundred and forty-two miles," replied Barbican; "it is
probably the greatest in the Moon, but many others measure more than a
hundred miles across."

"Dear boys," said Ardan, half to himself, half to the others, "only
imagine the delicious state of things on the surface of the gentle Moon
when these craters, brimming over with hissing lava, were vomiting
forth, all at the same time, showers of melted stones, clouds of
blinding smoke, and sheets of blasting flame! What an intensely
overpowering spectacle was here presented once, but now, how are the
mighty fallen! Our Moon, as at present beheld, seems to be nothing more
than the skinny spectre left after a brilliant display of fireworks,
when the spluttering crackers, the glittering wheels, the hissing
serpents, the revolving suns, and the dazzling stars, are all 'played
out', and nothing remains to tell of the gorgeous spectacle but a few
blackened sticks and half a dozen half burned bits of pasteboard. I
should like to hear one of you trying to explain the cause, the reason,
the principle, the philosophy of such tremendous cataclysms!"

Barbican's only reply was a series of nods, for in truth he had not
heard a single word of Ardan's philosophic explosion. His ears were with
his eyes, and these were obstinately bent on the gigantic ramparts of
_Clavius_, formed of concentric mountain ridges, which were actually
leagues in depth. On the floor of the vast cavity, could be seen
hundreds of smaller craters, mottling it like a skimming dish, and
pierced here and there by sharp peaks, one of which could hardly be less
than 15,000 feet high.

All around, the plain was desolate in the extreme. You could not
conceive how anything could be barrener than these serrated outlines, or
gloomier than these shattered mountains--until you looked at the plain
that encircled them. Ardan hardly exaggerated when he called it the
scene of a battle fought thousands of years ago but still white with the
hideous bones of overthrown peaks, slaughtered mountains and mutilated
precipices!

    "Hills amid the air encountered hills,
    Hurled to and fro in jaculation dire,"

murmured M'Nicholl, who could quote you Milton quite as readily as the
Bible.

"This must have been the spot," muttered Barbican to himself, "where the
brittle shell of the cooling sphere, being thicker than usual, offered
greater resistance to an eruption of the red-hot nucleus. Hence these
piled up buttresses, and these orderless heaps of consolidated lava and
ejected scoriæ."

The Projectile advanced, but the scene of desolation seemed to remain
unchanged. Craters, ring mountains, pitted plateaus dotted with
shapeless wrecks, succeeded each other without interruption. For level
plain, for dark "sea," for smooth plateau, the eye here sought in vain.
It was a Swiss Greenland, an Icelandic Norway, a Sahara of shattered
crust studded with countless hills of glassy lava.

At last, in the very centre of this blistered region, right too at its
very culmination, the travellers came on the brightest and most
remarkable mountain of the Moon. In the dazzling _Tycho_ they found it
an easy matter to recognize the famous lunar point, which the world will
for ever designate by the name of the distinguished astronomer of
Denmark.

This brilliant luminosity of the southern hemisphere, no one that ever
gazes at the Full Moon in a cloudless sky, can help noticing. Ardan, who
had always particularly admired it, now hailed it as an old friend, and
almost exhausted breath, imagination and vocabulary in the epithets with
which he greeted this cynosure of the lunar mountains.

"Hail!" he cried, "thou blazing focus of glittering streaks, thou
coruscating nucleus of irradiation, thou starting point of rays
divergent, thou egress of meteoric flashes! Hub of the silver wheel that
ever rolls in silent majesty over the starry plains of Night! Paragon of
jewels enchased in a carcanet of dazzling brilliants! Eye of the
universe, beaming with heavenly resplendescence!

"Who shall say what thou art? Diana's nimbus? The golden clasp of her
floating robes? The blazing head of the great bolt that rivets the lunar
hemispheres in union inseverable? Or cans't thou have been some errant
bolide, which missing its way, butted blindly against the lunar face,
and there stuck fast, like a Minie ball mashed against a cast-iron
target? Alas! nobody knows. Not even Barbican is able to penetrate thy
mystery. But one thing _I_ know. Thy dazzling glare so sore my eyes hath
made that longer on thy light to gaze I do not dare. Captain, have you
any smoked glass?"

In spite of this anti-climax, Ardan's companions could hardly consider
his utterings either as ridiculous or over enthusiastic. They could
easily excuse his excitement on the subject. And so could we, if we only
remember that _Tycho_, though nearly a quarter of a million miles
distant, is such a luminous point on the lunar disc, that almost any
moonlit night it can be easily perceived by the unaided terrestrial eye.
What then must have been its splendor in the eyes of our travellers
whose telescopes brought it actually four thousand times nearer! No
wonder that with smoked glasses, they endeavored to soften off its
effulgent glare! Then in hushed silence, or at most uttering at
intervals a few interjections expressive of their intense admiration,
they remained for some time completely engrossed in the overwhelming
spectacle. For the time being, every sentiment, impression, thought,
feeling on their part, was concentrated in the eye, just as at other
times under violent excitement every throb of our life is concentrated
in the heart.

_Tycho_ belongs to the system of lunar craters that is called
_radiating_, like _Aristarchus_ or _Copernicus_, which had been already
seen and highly admired by our travellers at their first approach to the
Moon. But it is decidedly the most remarkable and conspicuous of them
all. It occupies the great focus of disruption, whence it sends out
great streaks thousands of miles in length; and it gives the most
unmistakable evidence of the terribly eruptive nature of those forces
that once shattered the Moon's solidified shell in this portion of the
lunar surface.

Situated in the southern latitude of 43° by an eastern longitude of 12°,
_Tycho's_ crater, somewhat elliptical in shape, is 54 miles in diameter
and upwards of 16,000 feet in depth. Its lofty ramparts are buttressed
by other mountains, Mont Blancs in size, all grouped around it, and all
streaked with the great divergent fissures that radiate from it as a
centre.

Of what this incomparable mountain really is, with all these lines of
projections converging towards it and with all these prominent points
of relief protruding within its crater, photography has, so far, been
able to give us only a very unsatisfactory idea. The reason too is very
simple: it is only at Full Moon that _Tycho_ reveals himself in all his
splendor. The shadows therefore vanishing, the perspective
foreshortenings disappear and the views become little better than a dead
blank. This is the more to be regretted as this wonderful region is well
worthy of being represented with the greatest possible photographic
accuracy. It is a vast agglomeration of holes, craters, ring formations,
a complicated intersection of crests--in short, a distracting volcanic
network flung over the blistered soil. The ebullitions of the central
eruption still evidently preserve their original form. As they first
appeared, so they lie. Crystallizing as they cooled, they have
stereotyped in imperishable characters the aspect formerly presented by
the whole Moon's surface under the influences of recent plutonic
upheaval.

Our travellers were far more fortunate than the photographers. The
distance separating them from the peaks of _Tycho's_ concentric terraces
was not so considerable as to conceal the principal details from a very
satisfactory view. They could easily distinguish the annular ramparts of
the external circumvallation, the mountains buttressing the gigantic
walls internally as well as externally, the vast esplanades descending
irregularly and abruptly to the sunken plains all around. They could
even detect a difference of a few hundred feet in altitude in favor of
the western or right hand side over the eastern. They could also see
that these dividing ridges were actually inaccessible and completely
unsurmountable, at least by ordinary terrestrian efforts. No system of
castrametation ever devised by Polybius or Vauban could bear the
slightest comparison with such vast fortifications, A city built on the
floor of the circular cavity could be no more reached by the outside
Lunarians than if it had been built in the planet Mars.

This idea set Ardan off again. "Yes," said he, "such a city would be at
once completely inaccessible, and still not inconveniently situated in a
plateau full of aspects decidedly picturesque. Even in the depths of
this immense crater, Nature, as you can see, has left no flat and empty
void. You can easily trace its special oreography, its various mountain
systems which turn it into a regular world on a small scale. Notice its
cones, its central hills, its valleys, its substructures already cut and
dry and therefore quietly prepared to receive the masterpieces of
Selenite architecture. Down there to the left is a lovely spot for a
Saint Peter's; to the right, a magnificent site for a Forum; here a
Louvre could be built capable of entrancing Michael Angelo himself;
there a citadel could be raised to which even Gibraltar would be a
molehill! In the middle rises a sharp peak which can hardly be less than
a mile in height--a grand pedestal for the statue of some Selenite
Vincent de Paul or George Washington. And around them all is a mighty
mountain-ring at least 3 miles high, but which, to an eye looking from
the centre of our vast city, could not appear to be more than five or
six hundred feet. Enormous circus, where mighty Rome herself in her
palmiest days, though increased tenfold, would have no reason to
complain for want of room!"

He stopped for a few seconds, perhaps to take breath, and then resumed:

"Oh what an abode of serene happiness could be constructed within this
shadow-fringed ring of the mighty mountains! O blessed refuge,
unassailable by aught of human ills! What a calm unruffled life could be
enjoyed within thy hallowed precincts, even by those cynics, those
haters of humanity, those disgusted reconstructors of society, those
misanthropes and misogynists old and young, who are continually writing
whining verses in odd corners of the newspapers!"

"Right at last, Ardan, my boy!" cried M'Nicholl, quietly rubbing the
glass of his spectacles; "I should like to see the whole lot of them
carted in there without a moment's delay!"

"It couldn't hold the half of them!" observed Barbican drily.

[Footnote D: BALTIMORE GUN CLUB, pp. 295 _et seq._]




CHAPTER XVIII.

PUZZLING QUESTIONS.


It was not until the Projectile had passed a little beyond _Tycho's_
immense concavity that Barbican and his friends had a good opportunity
for observing the brilliant streaks sent so wonderfully flying in all
directions from this celebrated mountain as a common centre. They
examined them for some time with the closest attention.

What could be the nature of this radiating aureola? By what geological
phenomena could this blazing coma have been possibly produced? Such
questions were the most natural things in the world for Barbican and his
companions to propound to themselves, as indeed they have been to every
astronomer from the beginning of time, and probably will be to the end.

What _did_ they see? What you can see, what anybody can see on a clear
night when the Moon is full--only our friends had all the advantages of
a closer view. From _Tycho_, as a focus, radiated in all directions, as
from the head of a peeled orange, more than a hundred luminous streaks
or channels, edges raised, middle depressed--or perhaps _vice versa_,
owing to an optical illusion--some at least twelve miles wide, some
fully thirty. In certain directions they ran for a distance of at least
six hundred miles, and seemed--especially towards the west, northwest,
and north--to cover half the southern hemisphere. One of these flashes
extended as far as _Neander_ on the 40th meridian; another, curving
around so as to furrow the _Mare Nectaris_, came to an end on the chain
of the _Pyrenees_, after a course of perhaps a little more than seven
hundred miles. On the east, some of them barred with luminous network
the _Mare Nubium_ and even the _Mare Humorum_.

The most puzzling feature of these glittering streaks was that they ran
their course directly onward, apparently neither obstructed by valley,
crater, or mountain ridge however high. They all started, as said
before, from one common focus, _Tycho's_ crater. From this they
certainly all seemed to emanate. Could they be rivers of lava once
vomited from that centre by resistless volcanic agency and afterwards
crystallized into glassy rock? This idea of Herschel's, Barbican had no
hesitation in qualifying as exceedingly absurd. Rivers running in
perfectly straight lines, across plains, and _up_ as well as _down_
mountains!

"Other astronomers," he continued, "have looked on these streaks as a
peculiar kind of _moraines_, that is, long lines of erratic blocks
belched forth with mighty power at the period of _Tycho's_ own
upheaval."

"How do you like that theory, Barbican," asked the Captain.

"It's not a particle better than Herschel's," was the reply; "no
volcanic action could project rocks to a distance of six or seven
hundred miles, not to talk of laying them down so regularly that we
can't detect a break in them."

"Happy thought!" cried Ardan suddenly; "it seems to me that I can tell
the cause of these radiating streaks!"

"Let us hear it," said Barbican.

"Certainly," was Ardan's reply; "these streaks are all only the parts of
what we call a 'star,' as made by a stone striking ice; or by a ball, a
pane of glass."

"Not bad," smiled Barbican approvingly; "only where is the hand that
flung the stone or threw the ball?"

"The hand is hardly necessary," replied Ardan, by no means disconcerted;
"but as for the ball, what do you say to a comet?"

Here M'Nicholl laughed so loud that Ardan was seriously irritated.
However, before he could say anything cutting enough to make the Captain
mind his manners, Barbican had quickly resumed:

"Dear friend, let the comets alone, I beg of you; the old astronomers
fled to them on all occasions and made them explain every difficulty--"

--"The comets were all used up long ago--" interrupted M'Nicholl.

--"Yes," went on Barbican, as serenely as a judge, "comets, they said,
had fallen on the surface in meteoric showers and crushed in the crater
cavities; comets had dried up the water; comets had whisked off the
atmosphere; comets had done everything. All pure assumption! In your
case, however, friend Michael, no comet whatever is necessary. The shock
that gave rise to your great 'star' may have come from the interior
rather than the exterior. A violent contraction of the lunar crust in
the process of cooling may have given birth to your gigantic 'star'
formation."

"I accept the amendment," said Ardan, now in the best of humor and
looking triumphantly at M'Nicholl.

"An English scientist," continued Barbican, "Nasmyth by name, is
decidedly of your opinion, especially ever since a little experiment of
his own has confirmed him in it. He filled a glass globe with water,
hermetically sealed it, and then plunged it into a hot bath. The
enclosed water, expanding at a greater rate than the glass, burst the
latter, but, in doing so, it made a vast number of cracks all diverging
in every direction from the focus of disruption. Something like this he
conceives to have taken place around _Tycho_. As the crust cooled, it
cracked. The lava from the interior, oozing out, spread itself on both
sides of the cracks. This certainly explains pretty satisfactorily why
those flat glistening streaks are of much greater width than the
fissures through which the lava had at first made its way to the
surface."

"Well done for an Englishman!" cried Ardan in great spirits.

"He's no Englishman," said M'Nicholl, glad to have an opportunity of
coming off with some credit. "He is the famous Scotch engineer who
invented the steam hammer, the steam ram, and discovered the 'willow
leaves' in the Sun's disc."

"Better and better," said Ardan--"but, powers of Vulcan! What makes it
so hot? I'm actually roasting!"

This observation was hardly necessary to make his companions conscious
that by this time they felt extremely uncomfortable. The heat had become
quite oppressive. Between the natural caloric of the Sun and the
reflected caloric of the Moon, the Projectile was fast turning into a
regular bake oven. This transition from intense cold to intense heat was
already about quite as much as they could bear.

"What shall we do, Barbican?" asked Ardan, seeing that for some time no
one else appeared inclined to say a word.

"Nothing, at least yet awhile, friend Ardan," replied Barbican, "I have
been watching the thermometer carefully for the last few minutes, and,
though we are at present at 38° centigrade, or 100° Fahrenheit, I have
noticed that the mercury is slowly falling. You can also easily remark
for yourself that the floor of the Projectile is turning away more and
more from the lunar surface. From this I conclude quite confidently, and
I see that the Captain agrees with me, that all danger of death from
intense heat, though decidedly alarming ten minutes ago, is over for the
present and, for some time at least, it may be dismissed from further
consideration."

"I'm not very sorry for it," said Ardan cheerfully; "neither to be
baked like a pie in an oven nor roasted like a fat goose before a fire
is the kind of death I should like to die of."

"Yet from such a death you would suffer no more than your friends the
Selenites are exposed to every day of their lives," said the Captain,
evidently determined on getting up an argument.

"I understand the full bearing of your allusion, my dear Captain,"
replied Ardan quickly, but not at all in a tone showing that he was
disposed to second M'Nicholl's expectations.

He was, in fact, fast losing all his old habits of positivism. Latterly
he had seen much, but he had reflected more. The deeper he had
reflected, the more inclined he had become to accept the conclusion that
the less he knew. Hence he had decided that if M'Nicholl wanted an
argument it should not be with him. All speculative disputes he should
henceforth avoid; he would listen with pleasure to all that could be
urged on each side; he might even skirmish a little here and there as
the spirit moved him; but a regular pitched battle on a subject purely
speculative he was fully determined never again to enter into.

"Yes, dear Captain," he continued, "that pointed arrow of yours has by
no means missed its mark, but I can't deny that my faith is beginning to
be what you call a little 'shaky' in the existence of my friends the
Selenites. However, I should like to have your square opinion on the
matter. Barbican's also. We have witnessed many strange lunar phenomena
lately, closer and clearer than mortal eye ever rested on them before.
Has what we have seen confirmed any theory of yours or confounded any
hypothesis? Have you seen enough to induce you to adopt decided
conclusions? I will put the question formally. Do you, or do you not,
think that the Moon resembles the Earth in being the abode of animals
and intelligent beings? Come, answer, _messieurs_. Yes, or no?"

"I think we can answer your question categorically," replied Barbican,
"if you modify its form a little."

"Put the question any way you please," said Ardan; "only you answer it!
I'm not particular about the form."

"Good," said Barbican; "the question, being a double one, demands a
double answer. First: _Is the Moon inhabitable?_ Second: _Has the Moon
ever been inhabited?_"

"That's the way to go about it," said the Captain. "Now then, Ardan,
what do _you_ say to the first question? Yes, or no?"

"I really can't say anything," replied Ardan. "In the presence of such
distinguished scientists, I'm only a listener, a 'mere looker on in
Vienna' as the Divine Williams has it. However, for the sake of
argument, suppose I reply in the affirmative, and say that _the Moon is
inhabitable_."

"If you do, I shall most unhesitatingly contradict you," said Barbican,
feeling just then in splendid humor for carrying on an argument, not, of
course, for the sake of contradicting or conquering or crushing or
showing off or for any other vulgar weakness of lower minds, but for the
noble and indeed the only motive that should impel a philosopher--that
of _enlightening_ and _convincing_, "In taking the negative side,
however, or saying that the Moon is not inhabitable, I shall not be
satisfied with merely negative arguments. Many words, however, are not
required. Look at her present condition: her atmosphere dwindled away to
the lowest ebb; her 'seas' dried up or very nearly so; her waters
reduced to next to nothing; her vegetation, if existing at all, existing
only on the scantiest scale; her transitions from intense heat to
intense cold, as we ourselves can testify, sudden in the extreme; her
nights and her days each nearly 360 hours long. With all this positively
against her and nothing at all that we know of positively for her, I
have very little hesitation in saying that the Moon appears to me to be
absolutely uninhabitable. She seems to me not only unpropitious to the
development of the animal kingdom but actually incapable of sustaining
life at all--that is, in the sense that we usually attach to such a
term."

"That saving clause is well introduced, friend Barbican," said
M'Nicholl, who, seeing no chance of demolishing Ardan, had not yet made
up his mind as to having another little bout with the President. "For
surely you would not venture to assert that the Moon is uninhabitable by
a race of beings having an organization different from ours?"

"That question too, Captain," replied Barbican, "though a much more
difficult one, I shall try to answer. First, however, let us see,
Captain, if we agree on some fundamental points. How do we detect the
existence of life? Is it not by _movement_? Is not _motion_ its result,
no matter what may be its organization?"

"Well," said the Captain in a drawling way, "I guess we may grant that."

"Then, dear friends," resumed Barbican, "I must remind you that, though
we have had the privilege of observing the lunar continents at a
distance of not more than one-third of a mile, we have never yet caught
sight of the first thing moving on her surface. The presence of
humanity, even of the lowest type, would have revealed itself in some
form or other, by boundaries, by buildings, even by ruins. Now what
_have_ we seen? Everywhere and always, the geological works of _nature_;
nowhere and never, the orderly labors of _man_. Therefore, if any
representatives of animal life exist in the Moon, they must have taken
refuge in those bottomless abysses where our eyes were unable to track
them. And even this I can't admit. They could not always remain in these
cavities. If there is any atmosphere at all in the Moon, it must be
found in her immense low-lying plains. Over those plains her inhabitants
must have often passed, and on those plains they must in some way or
other have left some mark, some trace, some vestige of their existence,
were it even only a road. But you both know well that nowhere are any
such traces visible: therefore, they don't exist; therefore, no lunar
inhabitants exist--except, of course, such a race of beings, if we can
imagine any such, as could exist without revealing their existence by
_movement_."

"That is to say," broke in Ardan, to give what he conceived a sharper
point to Barbican's cogent arguments, "such a race of beings as could
exist without existing!"

"Precisely," said Barbican: "Life without movement, and no life at all,
are equivalent expressions."

"Captain," said Ardan, with all the gravity he could assume, "have you
anything more to say before the Moderator of our little Debating Society
gives his opinion on the arguments regarding the question before the
house?"

"No more at present," said the Captain, biding his time.

"Then," resumed Ardan, rising with much dignity, "the Committee on Lunar
Explorations, appointed by the Honorable Baltimore Gun Club, solemnly
assembled in the Projectile belonging to the aforesaid learned and
respectable Society, having carefully weighed all the arguments advanced
on each side of the question, and having also carefully considered all
the new facts bearing on the case that have lately come under the
personal notice of said Committee, unanimously decides negatively on the
question now before the chair for investigation--namely, 'Is the Moon
inhabitable?' Barbican, as chairman of the Committee, I empower you to
duly record our solemn decision--_No, the Moon is not inhabitable_."

Barbican, opening his note-book, made the proper entry among the minutes
of the meeting of December 6th.

"Now then, gentlemen," continued Ardan, "if you are ready for the second
question, the necessary complement of the first, we may as well approach
it at once. I propound it for discussion in the following form: _Has the
Moon ever been inhabited?_ Captain, the Committee would be delighted to
hear your remarks on the subject."

"Gentlemen," began the Captain in reply, "I had formed my opinion
regarding the ancient inhabitability of our Satellite long before I ever
dreamed of testing my theory by anything like our present journey. I
will now add that all our observations, so far made, have only served to
confirm me in my opinion. I now venture to assert, not only with every
kind of probability in my favor but also on what I consider most
excellent arguments, that the Moon was once inhabited by a race of
beings possessing an organization similar to our own, that she once
produced animals anatomically resembling our terrestrial animals, and
that all these living organizations, human and animal, have had their
day, that that day vanished ages and ages ago, and that, consequently,
_Life_, extinguished forever, can never again reveal its existence there
under any form."

"Is the Chair," asked Ardan, "to infer from the honorable gentleman's
observations that he considers the Moon to be a world much older than
the Earth?"

"Not exactly that," replied the Captain without hesitation; "I rather
mean to say that the Moon is a world that grew old more rapidly than the
Earth; that it came to maturity earlier; that it ripened quicker, and
was stricken with old age sooner. Owing to the difference of the volumes
of the two worlds, the organizing forces of matter must have been
comparatively much more violent in the interior of the Moon than in the
interior of the Earth. The present condition of its surface, as we see
it lying there beneath us at this moment, places this assertion beyond
all possibility of doubt. Wrinkled, pitted, knotted, furrowed, scarred,
nothing that we can show on Earth resembles it. Moon and Earth were
called into existence by the Creator probably at the same period of
time. In the first stages of their existence, they do not seem to have
been anything better than masses of gas. Acted upon by various forces
and various influences, all of course directed by an omnipotent
intelligence, these gases by degrees became liquid, and the liquids grew
condensed into solids until solidity could retain its shape. But the two
heavenly bodies, though starting at the same time, developed at a very
different ratio. Most undoubtedly, our globe was still gaseous or at
most only liquid, at the period when the Moon, already hardened by
cooling, began to become inhabitable."

"_Most undoubtedly_ is good!" observed Ardan admiringly.

"At this period," continued the learned Captain, "an atmosphere
surrounded her. The waters, shut in by this gaseous envelope, could no
longer evaporate. Under the combined influences of air, water, light,
and solar heat as well as internal heat, vegetation began to overspread
the continents by this time ready to receive it, and most undoubtedly--I
mean--a--incontestably--it was at this epoch that _life_ manifested
itself on the lunar surface. I say _incontestably_ advisedly, for Nature
never exhausts herself in producing useless things, and therefore a
world, so wonderfully inhabitable, _must_ of necessity have had
inhabitants."

"I like _of necessity_ too," said Ardan, who could never keep still; "I
always did, when I felt my arguments to be what you call a little
shaky."

"But, my dear Captain," here observed Barbican, "have you taken into
consideration some of the peculiarities of our Satellite which are
decidedly opposed to the development of vegetable and animal existence?
Those nights and days, for instance, 354 hours long?"

"I have considered them all," answered the brave Captain. "Days and
nights of such an enormous length would at the present time, I grant,
give rise to variations in temperature altogether intolerable to any
ordinary organization. But things were quite different in the era
alluded to. At that time, the atmosphere enveloped the Moon in a gaseous
mantle, and the vapors took the shape of clouds. By the screen thus
formed by the hand of nature, the heat of the solar rays was tempered
and the nocturnal radiation retarded. Light too, as well as heat, could
be modified, tempered, and _genialized_ if I may use the expression, by
the air. This produced a healthy counterpoise of forces, which, now that
the atmosphere has completely disappeared, of course exists no longer.
Besides--friend Ardan, you will excuse me for telling you something new,
something that will surprise you--"

--"Surprise me, my dear boy, fire away surprising me!" cried Ardan. "I
like dearly to be surprised. All I regret is that you scientists have
surprised me so much already that I shall never have a good, hearty,
genuine surprise again!"

--"I am most firmly convinced," continued the Captain, hardly waiting
for Ardan to finish, "that, at the period of the Moon's occupancy by
living creatures, her days and nights were by no means 354 hours long."

"Well! if anything could surprise me," said Ardan quickly, "such an
assertion as that most certainly would. On what does the honorable
gentleman base his _most firm conviction_?"

"We know," replied the Captain, "that the reason of the Moon's present
long day and night is the exact equality of the periods of her rotation
on her axis and of her revolution around the Earth. When she has turned
once around the Earth, she has turned once around herself. Consequently,
her back is turned to the Sun during one-half of the month; and her face
during the other half. Now, I don't believe that this state of things
existed at the period referred to."

"The gentleman does not believe!" exclaimed Ardan. "The Chair must be
excused for reminding the honorable gentleman that it can not accept his
incredulity as a sound and valid argument. These two movements have
certainly equal periods now; why not always?"

"For the simple reason that this equality of periods is due altogether
to the influence of terrestrial attraction," replied the ready Captain.
"This attraction at present, I grant, is so great that it actually
disables the Moon from revolving on herself; consequently she must
always keep the same face turned towards the Earth. But who can assert
that this attraction was powerful enough to exert the same influence at
the epoch when the Earth herself was only a fluid substance? In fact,
who can even assert that the Moon has always been the Earth's
satellite?"

"Ah, who indeed?" exclaimed Ardan. "And who can assert that the Moon did
not exist long before the Earth was called into being at all? In fact,
who can assert that the Earth itself is not a great piece broken off the
Moon? Nothing like asking absurd questions! I've often found them
passing for the best kind of arguments!"

"Friend Ardan," interposed Barbican, who noticed that the Captain was a
little too disconcerted to give a ready reply; "Friend Ardan, I must say
you are not quite wrong in showing how certain methods of reasoning,
legitimate enough in themselves, may be easily abused by being carried
too far. I think, however, that the Captain might maintain his position
without having recourse to speculations altogether too gigantic for
ordinary intellect. By simply admitting the insufficiency of the
primordeal attraction to preserve a perfect balance between the
movements of the lunar rotation and revolution, we can easily see how
the nights and days could once succeed each other on the Moon exactly as
they do at present on the Earth."

"Nothing can be clearer!" resumed the brave Captain, once more rushing
to the charge. "Besides, even without this alternation of days and
nights, life on the lunar surface was quite possible."

"Of course it was possible," said Ardan; "everything is possible except
what contradicts itself. It is possible too that every possibility is a
fact; therefore, it _is_ a fact. However," he added, not wishing to
press the Captain's weak points too closely, "let all these logical
niceties pass for the present. Now that you have established the
existence of your humanity in the Moon, the Chair would respectfully ask
how it has all so completely disappeared?"

"It disappeared completely thousands, perhaps millions, of years ago,"
replied the unabashed Captain. "It perished from the physical
impossibility of living any longer in a world where the atmosphere had
become by degrees too rare to be able to perform its functions as the
great resuscitating medium of dependent existences. What took place on
the Moon is only what is to take place some day or other on the Earth,
when it is sufficiently cooled off."

"Cooled off?"

"Yes," replied the Captain as confidently and with as little hesitation
as if he was explaining some of the details of his great machine-shop in
Philadelphia; "You see, according as the internal fire near the surface
was extinguished or was withdrawn towards the centre, the lunar shell
naturally cooled off. The logical consequences, of course, then
gradually took place: extinction of organized beings; and then
extinction of vegetation. The atmosphere, in the meantime, became
thinner and thinner--partly drawn off with the water evaporated by the
terrestrial attraction, and partly sinking with the solid water into the
crust-cracks caused by cooling. With the disappearance of air capable of
respiration, and of water capable of motion, the Moon, of course, became
uninhabitable. From that day it became the abode of death, as completely
as it is at the present moment."

"That is the fate in store for our Earth?"

"In all probability."

"And when is it to befall us?"

"Just as soon as the crust becomes cold enough to be uninhabitable."

"Perhaps your philosophership has taken the trouble to calculate how
many years it will take our unfortunate _Terra Mater_ to cool off?"

"Well; I have."

"And you can rely on your figures?"

"Implicitly."

"Why not tell it at once then to a fellow that's dying of impatience to
know all about it? Captain, the Chair considers you one of the most
tantalizing creatures in existence!"

"If you only listen, you will hear," replied M'Nicholl quietly. "By
careful observations, extended through a series of many years, men have
been able to discover the average loss of temperature endured by the
Earth in a century. Taking this as the ground work of their
calculations, they have ascertained that our Earth shall become an
uninhabitable planet in about--"

"Don't cut her life too short! Be merciful!" cried Ardan in a pleading
tone half in earnest. "Come, a good long day, your Honor! A good long
day!"

"The planet that we call the Earth," continued the Captain, as grave as
a judge, "will become uninhabitable to human beings, after a lapse of
400 thousand years from the present time."

"Hurrah!" cried Ardan, much relieved. "_Vive la Science!_ Henceforward,
what miscreant will persist in saying that the Savants are good for
nothing? Proudly pointing to this calculation, can't they exclaim to all
defamers: 'Silence, croakers! Our services are invaluable! Haven't we
insured the Earth for 400 thousand years?' Again I say _vive la
Science!_"

"Ardan," began the Captain with some asperity, "the foundations on
which Science has raised--"

"I'm half converted already," interrupted Ardan in a cheery tone; "I do
really believe that Science is not altogether unmitigated homebogue!
_Vive_--"

--"But what has all this to do with the question under discussion?"
interrupted Barbican, desirous to keep his friends from losing their
tempers in idle disputation.

"True!" said Ardan. "The Chair, thankful for being called to order,
would respectfully remind the house that the question before it is: _Has
the Moon been inhabited?_ Affirmative has been heard. Negative is called
on to reply. Mr. Barbican has the _parole_."

But Mr. Barbican was unwilling just then to enter too deeply into such
an exceedingly difficult subject. "The probabilities," he contented
himself with saying, "would appear to be in favor of the Captain's
speculations. But we must never forget that they _are_
speculations--nothing more. Not the slightest evidence has yet been
produced that the Moon is anything else than 'a dead and useless waste
of extinct volcanoes.' No signs of cities, no signs of buildings, not
even of ruins, none of anything that could be reasonably ascribed to the
labors of intelligent creatures. No sign of change of any kind has been
established. As for the agreement between the Moon's rotation and her
revolution, which compels her to keep the same face constantly turned
towards the Earth, we don't know that it has not existed from the
beginning. As for what is called the effect of volcanic agency upon her
surface, we don't know that her peculiar blistered appearance may not
have been brought about altogether by the bubbling and spitting that
blisters molten iron when cooling and contracting. Some close observers
have even ventured to account for her craters by saying they were due to
pelting showers of meteoric rain. Then again as to her atmosphere--why
should she have lost her atmosphere? Why should it sink into craters?
Atmosphere is gas, great in volume, small in matter; where would there
be room for it? Solidified by the intense cold? Possibly in the night
time. But would not the heat of the long day be great enough to thaw it
back again? The same trouble attends the alleged disappearance of the
water. Swallowed up in the cavernous cracks, it is said. But why are
there cracks? Cooling is not always attended by cracking. Water cools
without cracking; cannon balls cool without cracking. Too much stress
has been laid on the great difference between the _nucleus_ and the
_crust_: it is really impossible to say where one ends and the other
begins. In fact, no theory explains satisfactorily anything regarding
the present state of the Moon's surface. In fact, from the day that
Galileo compared her clustering craters to 'eyes on a peacock's tail' to
the present time, we must acknowledge that we know nothing more than we
can actually see, not one particle more of the Moon's history than our
telescopes reveal to our corporal eyes!"

"In the lucid opinion of the honorable and learned gentleman who spoke
last," said Ardan, "the Chair is compelled to concur. Therefore, as to
the second question before the house for deliberation, _Has the Moon
been ever inhabited?_ the Chair gets out of its difficulty, as a Scotch
jury does when it has not evidence enough either way, by returning a
solemn verdict of _Not Proven!_"

"And with this conclusion," said Barbican, hastily rising, "of a subject
on which, to tell the truth, we are unable as yet to throw any light
worth speaking of, let us be satisfied for the present. Another question
of greater moment to us just now is: where are we? It seems to me that
we are increasing our distance from the Moon very decidedly and very
rapidly."

It was easy to see that he was quite right in this observation. The
Projectile, still following a northerly course and therefore approaching
the lunar equator, was certainly getting farther and farther from the
Moon. Even at 30° S., only ten degrees farther north than the latitude
of _Tycho_, the travellers had considerable difficulty, comparatively,
in observing the details of _Pitatus_, a walled mountain on the south
shores of the _Mare Nubium_. In the "sea" itself, over which they now
floated, they could see very little, but far to the left, on the 20th
parallel, they could discern the vast crater of _Bullialdus_, 9,000
feet deep. On the right, they had just caught a glimpse of _Purbach_, a
depressed valley almost square in shape with a round crater in the
centre, when Ardan suddenly cried out:

"A Railroad!"

And, sure enough, right under them, a little northeast of _Purbach_, the
travellers easily distinguished a long line straight and black, really
not unlike a railroad cutting through a low hilly country.

This, Barbican explained, was of course no railway, but a steep cliff,
at least 1,000 feet high, casting a very deep shadow, and probably the
result of the caving in of the surface on the eastern edge.

Then they saw the immense crater of _Arzachel_ and in its midst a cone
mountain shining with dazzling splendor. A little north of this, they
could detect the outlines of another crater, _Alphonse_, at least 70
miles in diameter. Close to it they could easily distinguish the immense
crater or, as some observers call it, Ramparted Plain, _Ptolemy_, so
well known to lunar astronomers, occupying, as it does, such a favorable
position near the centre of the Moon, and having a diameter fully, in
one direction at least, 120 miles long.

The travellers were now in about the same latitude as that at which they
had at first approached the Moon, and it was here that they began most
unquestionably to leave her. They looked and looked, readjusting their
glasses, but the details were becoming more and more difficult to catch.
The reliefs grew more and more blurred and the outlines dimmer and
dimmer. Even the great mountain profiles began to fade away, the
dazzling colors to grow duller, the jet black shadows greyer, and the
general effect mistier.

At last, the distance had become so great that, of this lunar world so
wonderful, so fantastic, so weird, so mysterious, our travellers by
degrees lost even the consciousness, and their sensations, lately so
vivid, grew fainter and fainter, until finally they resembled those of a
man who is suddenly awakened from a peculiarly strange and impressive
dream.




CHAPTER XIX.

IN EVERY FIGHT, THE IMPOSSIBLE WINS.


No matter what we have been accustomed to, it is sad to bid it farewell
forever. The glimpse of the Moon's wondrous world imparted to Barbican
and his companions had been, like that of the Promised Land to Moses on
Mount Pisgah, only a distant and a dark one, yet it was with
inexpressibly mournful eyes that, silent and thoughtful, they now
watched her fading away slowly from their view, the conviction
impressing itself deeper and deeper in their souls that, slight as their
acquaintance had been, it was never to be renewed again. All doubt on
the subject was removed by the position gradually, but decidedly,
assumed by the Projectile. Its base was turning away slowly and steadily
from the Moon, and pointing surely and unmistakably towards the Earth.

Barbican had been long carefully noticing this modification, but without
being able to explain it. That the Projectile should withdraw a long
distance from the Moon and still be her satellite, he could understand;
but, being her satellite, why not present towards her its heaviest
segment, as the Moon does towards the Earth? That was the point which he
could not readily clear up.

By carefully noting its path, he thought he could see that the
Projectile, though now decidedly leaving the Moon, still followed a
curve exactly analogous to that by which it had approached her. It must
therefore be describing a very elongated ellipse, which might possibly
extend even to the neutral point where the lunar and terrestrial
attractions were mutually overcome.

With this surmise of Barbican's, his companions appeared rather disposed
to agree, though, of course, it gave rise to new questions.

"Suppose we reach this dead point," asked Ardan; "what then is to become
of us?"

"Can't tell!" was Barbican's unsatisfactory reply.

"But you can form a few hypotheses?"

"Yes, two!"

"Let us have them."

"The velocity will be either sufficient to carry us past the dead point,
or it will not: sufficient, we shall keep on, just as we are now,
gravitating forever around the Moon--"

--"Hypothesis number two will have at least one point in its favor,"
interrupted as usual the incorrigible Ardan; "it can't be worse than
hypothesis number one!"

--"Insufficient," continued Barbican, laying down the law, "we shall
rest forever motionless on the dead point of the mutually neutralizing
attractions."

"A pleasant prospect!" observed Ardan: "from the worst possible to no
better! Isn't it, Barbican?"

"Nothing to say," was Barbican's only reply.

"Have you nothing to say either, Captain?" asked Ardan, beginning to be
a little vexed at the apparent apathy of his companions.

"Nothing whatever," replied M'Nicholl, giving point to his words by a
despairing shake of his head.

"You don't mean surely that we're going to sit here, like bumps on a
log, doing nothing until it will be too late to attempt anything?"

"Nothing whatever can be done," said Barbican gloomily. "It is vain to
struggle against the impossible."

"Impossible! Where did you get that word? I thought the American
schoolboys had cut it out of their dictionaries!"

"That must have been since my time," said Barbican smiling grimly.

"It still sticks in a few old copies anyhow," drawled M'Nicholl drily,
as he carefully wiped his glasses.

"Well! it has no business _here_!" said Ardan. "What! A pair of live
Yankees and a Frenchman, of the nineteenth century too, recoil before an
old fashioned word that hardly scared our grandfathers!"

"What can we do?"

"Correct the movement that's now running away with us!"

"Correct it?"

"Certainly, correct it! or modify it! or clap brakes on it! or take
some advantage of it that will be in our favor! What matters the exact
term so you comprehend me?"

"Easy talking!"

"As easy doing!"

"Doing what? Doing how?"

"The what, and the how, is your business, not mine! What kind of an
artillery man is he who can't master his bullets? The gunner who cannot
command his own gun should be rammed into it head foremost himself and
blown from its mouth! A nice pair of savants _you_ are! There you sit as
helpless as a couple of babies, after having inveigled me--"

"Inveigled!!" cried Barbican and M'Nicholl starting to their feet in an
instant; "WHAT!!!"

"Come, come!" went on Ardan, not giving his indignant friends time to
utter a syllable; "I don't want any recrimination! I'm not the one to
complain! I'll even let up a little if you consider the expression too
strong! I'll even withdraw it altogether, and assert that the trip
delights me! that the Projectile is a thing after my own heart! that I
was never in better spirits than at the present moment! I don't
complain, I only appeal to your own good sense, and call upon you with
all my voice to do everything possible, so that we may go _somewhere_,
since it appears we can't get to the Moon!"

"But that's exactly what we want to do ourselves, friend Ardan," said
Barbican, endeavoring to give an example of calmness to the impatient
M'Nicholl; "the only trouble is that we have not the means to do it."

"Can't we modify the Projectile's movement?"

"No."

"Nor diminish its velocity?"

"No."

"Not even by lightening it, as a heavily laden ship is lightened, by
throwing cargo overboard?"

"What can we throw overboard? We have no ballast like balloon-men."

"I should like to know," interrupted M'Nicholl, "what would be the good
of throwing anything at all overboard. Any one with a particle of common
sense in his head, can see that the lightened Projectile should only
move the quicker!"

"Slower, you mean," said Ardan.

"Quicker, I mean," replied the Captain.

"Neither quicker nor slower, dear friends," interposed Barbican,
desirous to stop a quarrel; "we are floating, you know, in an absolute
void, where specific gravity never counts."

"Well then, my friends," said Ardan in a resigned tone that he evidently
endeavored to render calm, "since the worst is come to the worst, there
is but one thing left for us to do!"

"What's that?" said the Captain, getting ready to combat some new piece
of nonsense.

"To take our breakfast!" said the Frenchman curtly.

It was a resource he had often fallen back on in difficult
conjunctures. Nor did it fail him now.

Though it was not a project that claimed to affect either the velocity
or the direction of the Projectile, still, as it was eminently
practicable and not only unattended by no inconvenience on the one hand
but evidently fraught with many advantages on the other, it met with
decided and instantaneous success. It was rather an early hour for
breakfast, two o'clock in the morning, yet the meal was keenly relished.
Ardan served it up in charming style and crowned the dessert with a few
bottles of a wine especially selected for the occasion from his own
private stock. It was a _Tokay Imperial_ of 1863, the genuine _Essenz_,
from Prince Esterhazy's own wine cellar, and the best brain stimulant
and brain clearer in the world, as every connoisseur knows.

It was near four o'clock in the morning when our travellers, now well
fortified physically and morally, once more resumed their observations
with renewed courage and determination, and with a system of recording
really perfect in its arrangements.

Around the Projectile, they could still see floating most of the objects
that had been dropped out of the window. This convinced them that,
during their revolution around the Moon, they had not passed through any
atmosphere; had anything of the kind been encountered, it would have
revealed its presence by its retarding effect on the different objects
that now followed close in the wake of the Projectile. One or two that
were missing had been probably struck and carried off by a fragment of
the exploded bolide.

Of the Earth nothing as yet could be seen. She was only one day Old,
having been New the previous evening, and two days were still to elapse
before her crescent would be sufficiently cleared of the solar rays to
be capable of performing her ordinary duty of serving as a time-piece
for the Selenites. For, as the reflecting reader need hardly be
reminded, since she rotates with perfect regularity on her axis, she can
make such rotations visible to the Selenites by bringing some particular
point on her surface once every twenty-four hours directly over the same
lunar meridian.

Towards the Moon, the view though far less distinct, was still almost as
dazzling as ever. The radiant Queen of Night still glittered in all her
splendor in the midst of the starry host, whose pure white light seemed
to borrow only additional purity and silvery whiteness from the gorgeous
contrast. On her disc, the "seas" were already beginning to assume the
ashy tint so well known to us on Earth, but the rest of her surface
sparkled with all its former radiation, _Tycho_ glowing like a sun in
the midst of the general resplendescence.

Barbican attempted in vain to obtain even a tolerable approximation of
the velocity at which the Projectile was now moving. He had to content
himself with the knowledge that it was diminishing at a uniform rate--of
which indeed a little reflection on a well known law of Dynamics readily
convinced him. He had not much difficulty even in explaining the matter
to his friends.

"Once admitting," said he, "the Projectile to describe an orbit round
the Moon, that orbit must of necessity be an ellipse. Every moving body
circulating regularly around another, describes an ellipse. Science has
proved this incontestably. The satellites describe ellipses around the
planets, the planets around the Sun, the Sun himself describes an
ellipse around the unknown star that serves as a pivot for our whole
solar system. How can our Baltimore Gun Club Projectile then escape the
universal law?

"Now what is the consequence of this law? If the orbit were a _circle_,
the satellite would always preserve the same distance from its primary,
and its velocity should therefore be constant. But the orbit being an
_ellipse_, and the attracting body always occupying one of the foci, the
satellite must evidently lie nearer to this focus in one part of its
orbit than in another. The Earth when nearest to the Sun, is in her
_perihelion_; when most distant, in her _aphelion_. The Moon, with
regard to the Earth, is similarly in her _perigee_, and her _apogee_.
Analogous expressions denoting the relations of the Projectile towards
the Moon, would be _periselene_ and _aposelene_. At its _aposelene_ the
Projectile's velocity would have reached its minimum; at
the _periselene_, its maximum. As it is to the former point that we are
now moving, clearly the velocity must keep on diminishing until that
point is reached. Then, _if it does not die out altogether_, it must
spring up again, and even accelerate as it reapproaches the Moon. Now
the great trouble is this: If the _Aposelenetic_ point should coincide
with the point of lunar attraction, our velocity must certainly become
_nil_, and the Projectile must remain relatively motionless forever!"

"What do you mean by 'relatively motionless'?" asked M'Nicholl, who was
carefully studying the situation.

"I mean, of course, not absolutely motionless," answered Barbican;
"absolute immobility is, as you are well aware, altogether impossible,
but motionless with regard to the Earth and the--"

"By Mahomet's jackass!" interrupted Ardan hastily, "I must say we're a
precious set of _imbéciles_!"

"I don't deny it, dear friend," said Barbican quietly, notwithstanding
the unceremonious interruption; "but why do you say so just now?"

"Because though we are possessed of the power of retarding the velocity
that takes us from the Moon, we have never thought of employing it!"

"What do you mean?"

"Do you forget the rockets?"

"It's a fact!" cried M'Nicholl. "How have we forgotten them?"

"I'm sure I can't tell," answered Barbican, "unless, perhaps, because we
had too many other things to think about. Your thought, my dear friend,
is a most happy one, and, of course, we shall utilize it."

"When? How soon?"

"At the first favorable opportunity, not sooner. For you can see for
yourselves, dear friends," he went on explaining, "that with the present
obliquity of the Projectile with regard to the lunar disc, a discharge
of our rockets would be more likely to send us away from the Moon than
towards her. Of course, you are both still desirous of reaching the
Moon?"

"Most emphatically so!"

"Then by reserving our rockets for the last chance, we may possibly get
there after all. In consequence of some force, to me utterly
inexplicable, the Projectile still seems disposed to turn its base
towards the Earth. In fact, it is likely enough that at the neutral
point its cone will point vertically to the Moon. That being the moment
when its velocity will most probably be _nil_, it will also be the
moment for us to discharge our rockets, and the possibility is that we
may force a direct fall on the lunar disc."

"Good!" cried Ardan, clapping hands.

"Why didn't we execute this grand manoeuvre the first time we reached
the neutral point?" asked M'Nicholl a little crustily.

"It would be useless," answered Barbican; "the Projectile's velocity at
that time, as you no doubt remember, not only did not need rockets, but
was actually too great to be affected by them."

"True!" chimed in Ardan; "a wind of four miles an hour is very little
use to a steamer going ten."

"That assertion," cried M'Nicholl, "I am rather dis--"

--"Dear friends," interposed Barbican, his pale face beaming and his
clear voice ringing with the new excitement; "let us just now waste no
time in mere words. We have one more chance, perhaps a great one. Let us
not throw it away! We have been on the brink of despair--"

--"Beyond it!" cried Ardan.

--"But I now begin to see a possibility, nay, a very decided
probability, of our being able to attain the great end at last!"

"Bravo!" cried Ardan.

"Hurrah!" cried M'Nicholl.

"Yes! my brave boys!" cried Barbican as enthusiastically as his
companions; "all's not over yet by a long shot!"

What had brought about this great revulsion in the spirits of our bold
adventurers? The breakfast? Prince Esterhazy's Tokay? The latter, most
probably. What had become of the resolutions they had discussed so ably
and passed so decidedly a few hours before? _Was the Moon inhabited? No!
Was the Moon habitable? No!_ Yet in the face of all this--or rather as
coolly as if such subjects had never been alluded to--here were the
reckless scientists actually thinking of nothing but how to work heaven
and earth in order to get there!

One question more remained to be answered before they played their last
trump, namely: "At what precise moment would the Projectile reach the
neutral point?"

To this Barbican had very little trouble in finding an answer. The time
spent in proceeding from the south pole to the dead point being
evidently equal to the time previously spent in proceeding from the dead
point to the north pole--to ascertain the former, he had only to
calculate the latter. This was easily done. To refer to his notes, to
check off the different rates of velocity at which they had readied the
different parallels, and to turn these rates into time, required only a
very few minutes careful calculation. The Projectile then was to reach
the point of neutral attraction at one o'clock in the morning of
December 8th. At the present time, it was five o'clock in the morning of
the 7th; therefore, if nothing unforeseen should occur in the meantime,
their great and final effort was to be made about twenty hours later.

The rockets, so often alluded to as an idea of Ardan's and already fully
described, had been originally provided to break the violence of the
Projectile's fall on the lunar surface; but now the dauntless travellers
were about to employ them for a purpose precisely the reverse. In any
case, having been put in proper order for immediate use, nothing more
now remained to be done till the moment should come for firing them off.

"Now then, friends," said M'Nicholl, rubbing his eyes but hardly able to
keep them open, "I'm not over fond of talking, but this time I think I
may offer a slight proposition."

"We shall be most happy to entertain it, my dear Captain," said
Barbican.

[Illustration: ARDAN GAZED ON THE PAIR.]

"I propose we lie down and take a good nap."

"Good gracious!" protested Ardan; "What next?"

"We have not had a blessed wink for forty hours," continued the Captain;
"a little sleep would recuperate us wonderfully."

"No sleep now!" exclaimed Ardan.

"Every man to his taste!" said M'Nicholl; "mine at present is certainly
to turn in!" and suiting the action to the word, he coiled himself on
the sofa, and in a few minutes his deep regular breathing showed his
slumber to be as tranquil as an infant's.

Barbican looked at him in a kindly way, but only for a very short time;
his eyes grew so filmy that he could not keep them open any longer. "The
Captain," he said, "may not be without his little faults, but for good
practical sense he is worth a ship-load like you and me, Ardan. By Jove,
I'm going to imitate him, and, friend Michael, you might do worse!"

In a short time he was as unconscious as the Captain.

Ardan gazed on the pair for a few minutes, and then began to feel quite
lonely. Even his animals were fast asleep. He tried to look out, but
observing without having anybody to listen to your observations, is dull
work. He looked again at the sleeping pair, and then he gave in.

"It can't be denied," he muttered, slowly nodding his head, "that even
your practical men sometimes stumble on a good idea."

Then curling up his long legs, and folding his arms under his head, his
restless brain was soon forming fantastic shapes for itself in the
mysterious land of dreams.

But his slumbers were too much disturbed to last long. After an uneasy,
restless, unrefreshing attempt at repose, he sat up at about half-past
seven o'clock, and began stretching himself, when he found his
companions already awake and discussing the situation in whispers.

The Projectile, they were remarking, was still pursuing its way from the
Moon, and turning its conical point more and more in her direction. This
latter phenomenon, though as puzzling as ever, Barbican regarded with
decided pleasure: the more directly the conical summit pointed to the
Moon at the exact moment, the more directly towards her surface would
the rockets communicate their reactionary motion.

Nearly seventeen hours, however, were still to elapse before that
moment, that all important moment, would arrive.

The time began to drag. The excitement produced by the Moon's vicinity
had died out. Our travellers, though as daring and as confident as ever,
could not help feeling a certain sinking of heart at the approach of the
moment for deciding either alternative of their doom in this
world--their fall to the Moon, or their eternal imprisonment in a
changeless orbit. Barbican and M'Nicholl tried to kill time by revising
their calculations and putting their notes in order; Ardan, by
feverishly walking back and forth from window to window, and stopping
for a second or two to throw a nervous glance at the cold, silent and
impassive Moon.

Now and then reminiscences of our lower world would flit across their
brains. Visions of the famous Gun Club rose up before them the oftenest,
with their dear friend Marston always the central figure. What was his
bustling, honest, good-natured, impetuous heart at now? Most probably he
was standing bravely at his post on the Rocky Mountains, his eye glued
to the great Telescope, his whole soul peering through its tube. Had he
seen the Projectile before it vanished behind the Moon's north pole?
Could he have caught a glimpse of it at its reappearance? If so, could
he have concluded it to be the satellite of a satellite! Could Belfast
have announced to the world such a startling piece of intelligence? Was
that all the Earth was ever to know of their great enterprise? What were
the speculations of the Scientific World upon the subject? etc., etc.

In listless questions and desultory conversation of this kind the day
slowly wore away, without the occurrence of any incident whatever to
relieve its weary monotony. Midnight arrived, December the seventh was
dead. As Ardan said: "_Le Sept Decembre est mort; vive le Huit!_" In one
hour more, the neutral point would be reached. At what velocity was the
Projectile now moving? Barbican could not exactly tell, but he felt
quite certain that no serious error had slipped into his calculations.
At one o'clock that night, _nil_ the velocity was to be, and _nil_ it
would be!

Another phenomenon, in any case, was to mark the arrival of the exact
moment. At the dead point, the two attractions, terrestrial and lunar,
would again exactly counterbalance each other. For a few seconds,
objects would no longer possess the slightest weight. This curious
circumstance, which had so much surprised and amused the travellers at
its first occurrence, was now to appear again as soon as the conditions
should become identical. During these few seconds then would come the
moment for striking the decisive blow.

They could soon notice the gradual approach of this important instant.
Objects began to weigh sensibly lighter. The conical point of the
Projectile had become almost directly under the centre of the lunar
surface. This gladdened the hearts of the bold adventurers. The recoil
of the rockets losing none of its power by oblique action, the chances
pronounced decidedly in their favor. Now, only supposing the
Projectile's velocity to be absolutely annihilated at the dead point,
the slightest force directing it towards the Moon would be _certain_ to
cause it finally to fall on her surface.

Supposing!--but supposing the contrary!

--Even these brave adventurers had not the courage to suppose the
contrary!

"Five minutes to one o'clock," said M'Nicholl, his eyes never quitting
his watch.

"Ready?" asked Barbican of Ardan.

"Ay, ay, sir!" was Ardan's reply, as he made sure that the electric
apparatus to discharge the rockets was in perfect working order.

"Wait till I give the word," said Barbican, pulling out his chronometer.

The moment was now evidently close at hand. The objects lying around had
no weight. The travellers felt their bodies to be as buoyant as a
hydrogen balloon. Barbican let go his chronometer, but it kept its place
as firmly in empty space before his eyes as if it had been nailed to the
wall!

"One o'clock!" cried Barbican in a solemn tone.

Ardan instantly touched the discharging key of the little electric
battery. A dull, dead, distant report was immediately heard,
communicated probably by the vibration of the Projectile to the internal
air. But Ardan saw through the window a long thin flash, which vanished
in a second. At the same moment, the three friends became
instantaneously conscious of a slight shock experienced by the
Projectile.

They looked at each other, speechless, breathless, for about as long as
it would take you to count five: the silence so intense that they could
easily hear the pulsation of their hearts. Ardan was the first to break
it.

"Are we falling or are we not?" he asked in a loud whisper.

"We're not!" answered M'Nicholl, also hardly speaking above his breath.
"The base of the Projectile is still turned away as far as ever from the
Moon!"

Barbican, who had been looking out of the window, now turned hastily
towards his companions. His face frightened them. He was deadly pale;
his eyes stared, and his lips were painfully contracted.

"We _are_ falling!" he shrieked huskily.

"Towards the Moon?" exclaimed his companions.

"No!" was the terrible reply. "Towards the Earth!"

"_Sacré!_" cried Ardan, as usually letting off his excitement in French.

"Fire and fury!" cried M'Nicholl, completely startled out of his
habitual _sang froid_.

"Thunder and lightning!" swore the usually serene Barbican, now
completely stunned by the blow. "I had never expected this!"

Ardan was the first to recover from the deadening shock: his levity came
to his relief.

"First impressions are always right," he muttered philosophically. "The
moment I set eyes on the confounded thing, it reminded me of the
Bastille; it is now proving its likeness to a worse place: easy enough
to get into, but no redemption out of it!"

There was no longer any doubt possible on the subject. The terrible fall
had begun. The Projectile had retained velocity enough not only to carry
it beyond the dead point, but it was even able to completely overcome
the feeble resistance offered by the rockets. It was all clear now. The
same velocity that had carried the Projectile beyond the neutral point
on its way to the Moon, was still swaying it on its return to the Earth.
A well known law of motion required that, in the path which it was now
about to describe, _it should repass, on its return through all the
points through which it had already passed during its departure_.

No wonder that our friends were struck almost senseless when the fearful
fall they were now about to encounter, flashed upon them in all its
horror. They were to fall a clear distance of nearly 200 thousand miles!
To lighten or counteract such a descent, the most powerful springs,
checks, rockets, screens, deadeners, even if the whole Earth were
engaged in their construction--would produce no more effect than so many
spiderwebs. According to a simple law in Ballistics, _the Projectile was
to strike the Earth with a velocity equal to that by which it had been
animated when issuing from the mouth of the Columbiad_--a velocity of at
least seven miles a second!

To have even a faint idea of this enormous velocity, let us make a
little comparison. A body falling from the summit of a steeple a hundred
and fifty feet high, dashes against the pavement with a velocity of
fifty five miles an hour. Falling from the summit of St. Peter's, it
strikes the earth at the rate of 300 miles an hour, or five times
quicker than the rapidest express train. Falling from the neutral
point, the Projectile should strike the Earth with a velocity of more
than 25,000 miles an hour!

"We are lost!" said M'Nicholl gloomily, his philosophy yielding to
despair.

"One consolation, boys!" cried Ardan, genial to the last. "We shall die
together!"

"If we die," said Barbican calmly, but with a kind of suppressed
enthusiasm, "it will be only to remove to a more extended sphere of our
investigations. In the other world, we can pursue our inquiries under
far more favorable auspices. There the wonders of our great Creator,
clothed in brighter light, shall be brought within a shorter range. We
shall require no machine, nor projectile, nor material contrivance of
any kind to be enabled to contemplate them in all their grandeur and to
appreciate them fully and intelligently. Our souls, enlightened by the
emanations of the Eternal Wisdom, shall revel forever in the blessed
rays of Eternal Knowledge!"

"A grand view to take of it, dear friend Barbican;" replied Ardan, "and
a consoling one too. The privilege of roaming at will through God's
great universe should make ample amends for missing the Moon!"

M'Nicholl fixed his eyes on Barbican admiringly, feebly muttering with
hardly moving lips:

"Grit to the marrow! Grit to the marrow!"

Barbican, head bowed in reverence, arms folded across his breast, meekly
and uncomplainingly uttered with sublime resignation:

"Thy will be done!"

"Amen!" answered his companions, in a loud and fervent whisper.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were soon falling through the boundless regions of space with
inconceivable rapidity!




CHAPTER XX.

OFF THE PACIFIC COAST.


"Well, Lieutenant, how goes the sounding?"

"Pretty lively, Captain; we're nearly through;" replied the Lieutenant.
"But it's a tremendous depth so near land. We can't be more than 250
miles from the California coast."

"The depression certainly is far deeper than I had expected," observed
Captain Bloomsbury. "We have probably lit on a submarine valley
channelled out by the Japanese Current."

"The Japanese Current, Captain?"

"Certainly; that branch of it which breaks on the western shores of
North America and then flows southeast towards the Isthmus of Panama."

"That may account for it, Captain," replied young Brownson; "at least, I
hope it does, for then we may expect the valley to get shallower as we
leave the land. So far, there's no sign of a Telegraphic Plateau in this
quarter of the globe."

"Probably not, Brownson. How is the line now?"

"We have paid out 3500 fathoms already, Captain, but, judging from the
rate the reel goes at, we are still some distance from bottom."

As he spoke, he pointed to a tall derrick temporarily rigged up at the
stern of the vessel for the purpose of working the sounding apparatus,
and surrounded by a group of busy men. Through a block pulley strongly
lashed to the derrick, a stout cord of the best Italian hemp, wound off
a large reel placed amidships, was now running rapidly and with a slight
whirring noise.

"I hope it's not the 'cup-lead' you are using, Brownson?" said the
Captain, after a few minutes observation.

"Oh no, Captain, certainly not," replied the Lieutenant. "It's only
Brooke's apparatus that is of any use in such depths."

"Clever fellow that Brooke," observed the Captain; "served with him
under Maury. His detachment of the weight is really the starting point
for every new improvement in sounding gear. The English, the French, and
even our own, are nothing but modifications of that fundamental
principle. Exceedingly clever fellow!"

"Bottom!" sang out one of the men standing near the derrick and watching
the operations.

The Captain and the Lieutenant immediately advanced to question him.

"What's the depth, Coleman?" asked the Lieutenant.

"21,762 feet," was the prompt reply, which Brownson immediately
inscribed in his note-book, handing a duplicate to the Captain.

"All right, Lieutenant," observed the Captain, after a moment's
inspection of the figures. "While I enter it in the log, you haul the
line aboard. To do so, I need hardly remind you, is a task involving
care and patience. In spite of all our gallant little donkey engine can
do, it's a six hours job at least. Meanwhile, the Chief Engineer had
better give orders for firing up, so that we may be ready to start as
soon as you're through. It's now close on to four bells, and with your
permission I shall turn in. Let me be called at three. Good night!"

"Goodnight, Captain!" replied Brownson, who spent the next two hours
pacing backward and forward on the quarter deck, watching the hauling in
of the sounding line, and occasionally casting a glance towards all
quarters of the sky.

It was a glorious night. The innumerable stars glittered with the
brilliancy of the purest gems. The ship, hove to in order to take the
soundings, swung gently on the faintly heaving ocean breast. You felt
you were in a tropical clime, for, though no breath fanned your cheek,
your senses easily detected the delicious odor of a distant garden of
sweet roses. The sea sparkled with phosphorescence. Not a sound was
heard except the panting of the hard-worked little donkey-engine and the
whirr of the line as it came up taut and dripping from the ocean depths.
The lamp, hanging from the mast, threw a bright glare on deck,
presenting the strongest contrast with the black shadows, firm and
motionless as marble. The 11th day of December was now near its last
hour.

The steamer was the _Susquehanna_, a screw, of the United States Navy,
4,000 in tonnage, and carrying 20 guns. She had been detached to take
soundings between the Pacific coast and the Sandwich Islands, the
initiatory movement towards laying down an Ocean Cable, which the
_Pacific Cable Company_ contemplated finally extending to China. She lay
just now a few hundred miles directly south of San Diego, an old Spanish
town in southwestern California, and the point which is expected to be
the terminus of the great _Texas and Pacific Railroad_.

The Captain, John Bloomsbury by name, but better known as 'High-Low
Jack' from his great love of that game--the only one he was ever known
to play--was a near relation of our old friend Colonel Bloomsbury of the
Baltimore Gun Club. Of a good Kentucky family, and educated at
Annapolis, he had passed his meridian without ever being heard of, when
suddenly the news that he had run the gauntlet in a little gunboat past
the terrible batteries of Island Number Ten, amidst a perfect storm of
shell, grape and canister discharged at less than a hundred yards
distance, burst on the American nation on the sixth of April, 1862, and
inscribed his name at once in deep characters on the list of the giants
of the Great War. But war had never been his vocation. With the return
of peace, he had sought and obtained employment on the Western Coast
Survey, where every thing he did he looked on as a labor of love. The
Sounding Expedition he had particularly coveted, and, once entered upon
it, he discharged his duties with characteristic energy.

He could not have had more favorable weather than the present for a
successful performance of the nice and delicate investigations of
sounding. His vessel had even been fortunate enough to have lain
altogether out of the track of the terrible wind storm already alluded
to, which, starting from somewhere southwest of the Sierra Madre, had
swept away every vestige of mist from the summits of the Rocky Mountains
and, by revealing the Moon in all her splendor, had enabled Belfast to
send the famous despatch announcing that he had seen the Projectile.
Every feature of the expedition was, in fact, advancing so favorably
that the Captain expected to be able, in a month or two, to submit to
the _P.C. Company_ a most satisfactory report of his labors.

Cyrus W. Field, the life and soul of the whole enterprise, flushed with
honors still in full bloom (the Atlantic Telegraph Cable having been
just laid), could congratulate himself with good reason on having found
a treasure in the Captain. High-Low Jack was the congenial spirit by
whose active and intelligent aid he promised himself the pleasure of
seeing before long the whole Pacific Ocean covered with a vast
reticulation of electric cables. The practical part, therefore, being in
such safe hands, Mr. Field could remain with a quiet conscience in
Washington, New York or London, seeing after the financial part of the
grand undertaking, worthy of the Nineteenth Century, worthy of the Great
Republic, and eminently worthy of the illustrious CYRUS W. himself!

As already mentioned, the _Susquehanna_ lay a few hundred miles south
of San Diego, or, to be more accurate, in 27° 7' North Latitude and 118°
37' West Longitude (Greenwich).

It was now a little past midnight. The Moon, in her last quarter, was
just beginning to peep over the eastern horizon. Lieutenant Brownson,
leaving the quarter deck, had gone to the forecastle, where he found a
crowd of officers talking together earnestly and directing their glasses
towards her disc. Even here, out on the ocean, the Queen of the night,
was as great an object of attraction as on the North American Continent
generally, where, that very night and that very hour, at least 40
million pairs of eyes were anxiously gazing at her. Apparently forgetful
that even the very best of their glasses could no more see the
Projectile than angulate Sirius, the officers held them fast to their
eyes for five minutes at a time, and then took them away only to talk
with remarkable fluency on what they had not discovered.

"Any sign of them yet, gentlemen?" asked Brownson gaily as he joined the
group. "It's now pretty near time for them to put in an appearance.
They're gone ten days I should think."

"They're there, Lieutenant! not a doubt of it!" cried a young midshipman,
fresh from Annapolis, and of course "throughly posted" in the latest
revelations of Astronomy. "I feel as certain of their being there as I
am of our being here on the forecastle of the _Susquehanna_!"

"I must agree with you of course, Mr. Midshipman," replied Brownson
with a slight smile; "I have no grounds whatever for contradicting you."

"Neither have I," observed another officer, the surgeon of the vessel.
"The Projectile was to have reached the Moon when at her full, which was
at midnight on the 5th. To-day was the 11th. This gives them six days of
clear light--time enough in all conscience not only to land safely but
to install themselves quite comfortably in their new home. In fact, I
see them there already--"

"In my mind's eye, Horatio!" laughed one of the group. "Though the Doc
wears glasses, he can see more than any ten men on board."

--"Already"--pursued the Doctor, heedless of the interruption. "_Scene_,
a stony valley near a Selenite stream; the Projectile on the right, half
buried in volcanic _scoriae_, but apparently not much the worse for the
wear; ring mountains, craters, sharp peaks, etc. all around; old MAC
discovered taking observations with his levelling staff; BARBICAN
perched on the summit of a sharp pointed rock, writing up his note-book;
ARDAN, eye-glass on nose, hat under arm, legs apart, puffing at his
_Imperador_, like a--"

[Illustration: MAC DISCOVERED TAKING OBSERVATIONS.]

--"A locomotive!" interrupted the young Midshipman, his excitable
imagination so far getting the better of him as to make him forget his
manners. He had just finished Locke's famous MOON HOAX, and his brain
was still full of its pictures. "In the background," he went on, "can be
seen thousands of _Vespertiliones-Homines_ or _Man-Bats_, in all the
various attitudes of curiosity, alarm, or consternation; some of them
peeping around the rocks, some fluttering from peak to peak, all
gibbering a language more or less resembling the notes of birds. _Enter_
LUNATICO, King of the Selenites--"

"Excuse us, Mr. Midshipman," interrupted Brownson with an easy smile,
"Locke's authority may have great weight among the young Middies at
Annapolis, but it does not rank very high at present in the estimation
of practical scientists." This rebuff administered to the conceited
little Midshipman, a rebuff which the Doctor particularly relished,
Brownson continued: "Gentlemen, we certainly know nothing whatever
regarding our friends' fate; guessing gives no information. How we ever
are to hear from the Moon until we are connected with it by a lunar
cable, I can't even imagine. The probability is that we shall never--"

"Excuse me, Lieutenant," interrupted the unrebuffed little Midshipman;
"Can't Barbican write?"

A shout of derisive comments greeted this question.

"Certainly he can write, and send his letter by the Pony Express!" cried
one.

"A Postal Card would be cheaper!" cried another.

"The _New York Herald_ will send a reporter after it!" was the
exclamation of a third.

"Keep cool, just keep cool, gentlemen," persisted the little Midshipman,
not in the least abashed by the uproarious hilarity excited by his
remarks. "I asked if Barbican couldn't write. In that question I see
nothing whatever to laugh at. Can't a man write without being obliged to
send his letters?"

"This is all nonsense," said the Doctor. "What's the use of a man
writing to you if he can't send you what he writes?"

"What's the use of his sending it to you if he can have it read without
that trouble?" answered the little Midshipman in a confident tone. "Is
there not a telescope at Long's Peak? Doesn't it bring the Moon within a
few miles of the Rocky Mountains, and enable us to see on her surface,
objects as small as nine feet in diameter? Well! What's to prevent
Barbican and his friends from constructing a gigantic alphabet? If they
write words of even a few hundred yards and sentences a mile or two
long, what is to prevent us from reading them? Catch the idea now, eh?"

They did catch the idea, and heartily applauded the little Middy for his
smartness. Even the Doctor saw a certain kind of merit in it, and
Brownson acknowledged it to be quite feasible. In fact, expanding on it,
the Lieutenant assured his hearers that, by means of large parabolic
reflectors, luminous groups of rays could be dispatched from the Earth,
of sufficient brightness to establish direct communication even with
Venus or Mars, where these rays would be quite as visible as the planet
Neptune is from the Earth. He even added that those brilliant points of
light, which have been quite frequently observed in Mars and Venus, are
perhaps signals made to the Earth by the inhabitants of these planets.
He concluded, however, by observing that, though we might by these means
succeed in obtaining news from the Moon, we could not possibly send any
intelligence back in return, unless indeed the Selenites had at their
disposal optical instruments at least as good as ours.

All agreed that this was very true, and, as is generally the case when
one keeps all the talk to himself, the conversation now assumed so
serious a turn that for some time it was hardly worth recording.

At last the Chief Engineer, excited by some remark that had been made,
observed with much earnestness:

"You may say what you please, gentlemen, but I would willingly give my
last dollar to know what has become of those brave men! Have they done
anything? Have they seen anything? I hope they have. But I should dearly
like to know. Ever so little success would warrant a repetition of the
great experiment. The Columbiad is still to the good in Florida, as it
will be for many a long day. There are millions of men to day as curious
as I am upon the subject. Therefore it will be only a question of mere
powder and bullets if a cargo of visitors is not sent to the Moon every
time she passes our zenith.

"Marston would be one of the first of them," observed Brownson, lighting
his cigar.

"Oh, he would have plenty of company!" cried the Midshipman. "I should
be delighted to go if he'd only take me."

"No doubt you would, Mr. Midshipman," said Brownson, "the wise men, you
know, are not all dead yet."

"Nor the fools either, Lieutenant," growled old Frisby, the fourth
officer, getting tired of the conversation.

"There is no question at all about it," observed another; "every time a
Projectile started, it would take off as many as it could carry."

"I wish it would only start often enough to improve the breed!" growled
old Frisby.

"I have no doubt whatever," added the Chief Engineer, "that the thing
would get so fashionable at last that half the inhabitants of the Earth
would take a trip to the Moon."

"I should limit that privilege strictly to some of our friends in
Washington," said old Frisby, whose temper had been soured probably by a
neglect to recognize his long services; "and most of them I should by
all means insist on sending to the Moon. Every month I would ram a whole
raft of them into the Columbiad, with a charge under them strong enough
to blow them all to the--But--Hey!--what in creation's that?"

[Illustration: FOR A SECOND ONLY DID THEY CATCH ITS FLASH.]

Whilst the officer was speaking, his companions had suddenly caught a
sound in the air which reminded them immediately of the whistling scream
of a Lancaster shell. At first they thought the steam was escaping
somewhere, but, looking upwards, they saw that the strange noise
proceeded from a ball of dazzling brightness, directly over their heads,
and evidently falling towards them with tremendous velocity. Too
frightened to say a word, they could only see that in its light the
whole ship blazed like fireworks, and the whole sea glittered like a
silver lake. Quicker than tongue can utter, or mind can conceive, it
flashed before their eyes for a second, an enormous bolide set on fire
by friction with the atmosphere, and gleaming in its white heat like a
stream of molten iron gushing straight from the furnace. For a second
only did they catch its flash before their eyes; then striking the
bowsprit of the vessel, which it shivered into a thousand pieces, it
vanished in the sea in an instant with a hiss, a scream, and a roar, all
equally indescribable. For some time the utmost confusion reigned on
deck. With eyes too dazzled to see, ears still ringing with the
frightful combination of unearthly sounds, faces splashed with floods of
sea water, and noses stifled with clouds of scalding steam, the crew of
the _Susquehanna_ could hardly realize that their marvellous escape by a
few feet from instant and certain destruction was an accomplished fact,
not a frightful dream. They were still engaged in trying to open their
eyes and to get the hot water out of their ears, when they suddenly
heard the trumpet voice of Captain Bloomsbury crying, as he stood half
dressed on the head of the cabin stairs:

"What's up, gentlemen? In heaven's name, what's up?"

The little Midshipman had been knocked flat by the concussion and
stunned by the uproar. But before any body else could reply, his voice
was heard, clear and sharp, piercing the din like an arrow:

"It's THEY, Captain! Didn't I tell you so?"




CHAPTER XXI.

NEWS FOR MARSTON!


In a few minutes, consciousness had restored order on board the
_Susquehanna_, but the excitement was as great as ever. They had escaped
by a hairsbreadth the terrible fate of being both burned and drowned
without a moment's warning, without a single soul being left alive to
tell the fatal tale; but on this neither officer nor man appeared to
bestow the slightest thought. They were wholly engrossed with the
terrible catastrophe that had befallen the famous adventurers. What was
the loss of the _Susquehanna_ and all it contained, in comparison to the
loss experienced by the world at large in the terrible tragic
_dénouement_ just witnessed? The worst had now come to the worst. At
last the long agony was over forever. Those three gallant men, who had
not only conceived but had actually executed the grandest and most
daring enterprise of ancient or modern times, had paid by the most
fearful of deaths, for their sublime devotion to science and their
unselfish desire to extend the bounds of human knowledge! Before such a
reflection as this, all other considerations were at once reduced to
proportions of the most absolute insignificance.

But was the death of the adventurers so very certain after all? Hope is
hard to kill. Consciousness had brought reflection, reflection doubt,
and doubt had resuscitated hope.

"It's they!" had exclaimed the little Midshipman, and the cry had
thrilled every heart on board as with an electric shock. Everybody had
instantly understood it. Everybody had felt it to be true. Nothing could
be more certain than that the meteor which had just flashed before their
eyes was the famous projectile of the Baltimore Gun Club. Nothing could
be truer than that it contained the three world renowned men and that it
now lay in the black depths of the Pacific Ocean.

But here opinions began to diverge. Some courageous breasts soon refused
to accept the prevalent idea.

"They're killed by the shock!" cried the crowd.

"Killed?" exclaimed the hopeful ones; "Not a bit of it! The water here
is deep enough to break a fall twice as great."

"They're smothered for want of air!" exclaimed the crowd.

"Their stock may not be run out yet!" was the ready reply. "Their air
apparatus is still on hand."

"They're burned to a cinder!" shrieked the crowd.

"They had not time to be burned!" answered the Band of Hope. "The
Projectile did not get hot till it reached the atmosphere, through which
it tore in a few seconds."

"If they're neither burned nor smothered nor killed by the shock,
they're sure to be drowned!" persisted the crowd, with redoubled
lamentations.

"Fish 'em up first!" cried the Hopeful Band. "Come! Let's lose no time!
Let's fish 'em up at once!"

The cries of Hope prevailed. The unanimous opinion of a council of the
officers hastily summoned together by the Captain was to go to work and
fish up the Projectile with the least possible delay. But was such an
operation possible? asked a doubter. Yes! was the overwhelming reply;
difficult, no doubt, but still quite possible. Certainly, however, such
an attempt was not immediately possible as the _Susquehanna_ had no
machinery strong enough or suitable enough for a piece of work involving
such a nicety of detailed operations, not to speak of its exceeding
difficulty. The next unanimous decision, therefore, was to start the
vessel at once for the nearest port, whence they could instantly
telegraph the Projectile's arrival to the Baltimore Gun Club.

But what _was_ the nearest port? A serious question, to answer which in
a satisfactory manner the Captain had to carefully examine his sailing
charts. The neighboring shores of the California Peninsula, low and
sandy, were absolutely destitute of good harbors. San Diego, about a
day's sail directly north, possessed an excellent harbor, but, not yet
having telegraphic communication with the rest of the Union, it was of
course not to be thought of. San Pedro Bay was too open to be approached
in winter. The Santa Barbara Channel was liable to the same objection,
not to mention the trouble often caused by kelp and wintry fogs. The bay
of San Luis Obispo was still worse in every respect; having no islands
to act as a breakwater, landing there in winter was often impossible.
The harbor of the picturesque old town of Monterey was safe enough, but
some uncertainty regarding sure telegraphic communications with San
Francisco, decided the council not to venture it. Half Moon Bay, a
little to the north, would be just as risky, and in moments like the
present when every minute was worth a day, no risk involving the
slightest loss of time could be ventured.

Evidently, therefore, the most advisable plan was to sail directly for
the bay of San Francisco, the Golden Gate, the finest harbor on the
Pacific Coast and one of the safest in the world. Here telegraphic
communication with all parts of the Union was assured beyond a doubt.
San Francisco, about 750 miles distant, the _Susquehanna_ could probably
make in three days; with a little increased pressure, possibly in two
days and a-half. The sooner then she started, the better.

The fires were soon in full blast. The vessel could get under weigh at
once. In fact, nothing delayed immediate departure but the consideration
that two miles of sounding line were still to be hauled up from the
ocean depths. Rut the Captain, after a moment's thought, unwilling that
any more time should be lost, determined to cut it. Then marking its
position by fastening its end to a buoy, he could haul it up at his
leisure on his return.

"Besides," said he, "the buoy will show us the precise spot where the
Projectile fell."

"As for that, Captain," observed Brownson, "the exact spot has been
carefully recorded already: 27° 7' north latitude by 41° 37' west
longitude, reckoning from the meridian of Washington."

"All right, Lieutenant," said the Captain curtly. "Cut the line!"

A large cone-shaped metal buoy, strengthened still further by a couple
of stout spars to which it was securely lashed, was soon rigged up on
deck, whence, being hoisted overboard, the whole apparatus was carefully
lowered to the surface of the sea. By means of a ring in the small end
of the buoy, the latter was then solidly attached to the part of the
sounding line that still remained in the water, and all possible
precautions were taken to diminish the danger of friction, caused by the
contrary currents, tidal waves, and the ordinary heaving swells of
ocean.

It was now a little after three o'clock in the morning. The Chief
Engineer announced everything to be in perfect readiness for starting.
The Captain gave the signal, directing the pilot to steer straight for
San Francisco, north-north by west. The waters under the stern began to
boil and foam; the ship very soon felt and yielded to the power that
animated her; and in a few minutes she was making at least twelve knots
an hour. Her sailing powers were somewhat higher than this, but it was
necessary to be careful in the neighborhood of such a dangerous coast as
that of California.

Seven hundred and fifty miles of smooth waters presented no very
difficult task to a fast traveller like the _Susquehanna_, yet it was
not till two days and a-half afterwards that she sighted the Golden
Gate. As usual, the coast was foggy; neither Point Lobos nor Point
Boneta could be seen. But Captain Bloomsbury, well acquainted with every
portion of this coast, ran as close along the southern shore as he
dared, the fog-gun at Point Boneta safely directing his course. Here
expecting to be able to gain a few hours time by signalling to the outer
telegraph station on Point Lobos, he had caused to be painted on a sail
in large black letters: "THE MOONMEN ARE BACK!" but the officers in
attendance, though their fog-horn could be easily heard--the distance
not being quite two miles--were unfortunately not able to see it.
Perhaps they did see it, but feared a hoax.

Giving the Fort Point a good wide berth, the _Susquehanna_ found the fog
gradually clearing away, and by half-past three the passengers, looking
under it, enjoyed the glorious view of the Contra Costa mountains east
of San Francisco, which had obtained for this entrance the famous and
well deserved appellation of the Golden Gate. In another half hour, they
had doubled Black Point, and were lying safely at anchor between the
islands of Alcatraz and Yerba Buena. In less than five minutes
afterwards the Captain was quickly lowered into his gig, and eight stout
pairs of arms were pulling him rapidly to shore.

The usual crowd of idlers had collected that evening on the summit of
Telegraph Hill to enjoy the magnificent view, which for variety, extent,
beauty and grandeur, is probably unsurpassed on earth. Of course, the
inevitable reporter, hot after an item, was not absent. The
_Susquehanna_ had hardly crossed the bar, when they caught sight of her.
A government vessel entering the bay at full speed, is something to look
at even in San Francisco. Even during the war, it would be considered
rather unusual. But they soon remarked that her bowsprit was completely
broken off. _Very_ unusual. Something decidedly is the matter. See! The
vessel is hardly anchored when the Captain leaves her and makes for
Megg's Wharf at North Point as hard as ever his men can pull! Something
_must_ be the matter--and down the steep hill they all rush as fast as
ever their legs can carry them to the landing at Megg's Wharf.

The Captain could hardly force his way through the dense throng, but he
made no attempt whatever to gratify their ill dissembled curiosity.

"Carriage!" he cried, in a voice seldom heard outside the din of battle.

In a moment seventeen able-bodied cabmen were trying to tear him limb
from limb.

"To the telegraph office! Like lightning!" were his stifled mutterings,
as he struggled in the arms of the Irish giant who had at last
succeeded in securing him.

"To the telegraph office!" cried most of the crowd, running after him
like fox hounds, but the more knowing ones immediately began questioning
the boatmen in the Captain's gig. These honest fellows, nothing loth to
tell all that they knew and more that they invented, soon had the
satisfaction of finding themselves the centrepoint of a wonder stricken
audience, greedily swallowing up every item of the extraordinary news
and still hungrily gaping for more.

By this time, however, an important dispatch was flying east, bearing
four different addresses: To the Secretary of the U.S. Navy, Washington;
To Colonel Joseph Wilcox, Vice-President _pro tem._, Baltimore Gun Club,
Md; To J.T. Marston, Esq. Long's Peak, Grand County, Colorado; and To
Professor Wenlock, Sub-Director of the Cambridge Observatory, Mass.

This dispatch read as follows:

     "In latitude twenty-seven degrees seven minutes north and longitude
     forty-one degrees thirty-seven minutes west shortly after one
     o'clock on the morning of twelfth instant Columbiad Projectile fell
     in Pacific--send instructions--

     BLOOMSBURY,

     _Captain_, SUSQUEHANNA."

In five minutes more all San Francisco had the news. An hour later, the
newspaper boys were shrieking it through the great cities of the
States. Before bed-time every man, woman, and child in the country had
heard it and gone into ecstasies over it. Owing to the difference in
longitude, the people of Europe could not hear it till after midnight.
But next morning the astounding issue of the great American enterprise
fell on them like a thunder clap.

We must, of course, decline all attempts at describing the effects of
this most unexpected intelligence on the world at large.

The Secretary of the Navy immediately telegraphed directions to the
_Susquehanna_ to keep a full head of steam up night and day so as to be
ready to give instant execution to orders received at any moment.

The Observatory authorities at Cambridge held a special meeting that
very evening, where, with all the serene calmness so characteristic of
learned societies, they discussed the scientific points of the question
in all its bearings. But, before committing themselves to any decided
opinion, they unanimously resolved to wait for the development of
further details.

At the rooms of the Gun Club in Baltimore there was a terrible time. The
kind reader no doubt remembers the nature of the dispatch sent one day
previously by Professor Belfast from the Long's Peak observatory,
announcing that the Projectile had been seen but that it had become the
Moon's satellite, destined to revolve around her forever and ever till
time should be no more. The reader is also kindly aware by this time
that such dispatch was not supported by the slightest foundations in
fact. The learned Professor, in a moment of temporary cerebral
excitation, to which even the greatest scientist is just as liable as
the rest of us, had taken some little meteor or, still more probably,
some little fly-speck in the telescope for the Projectile. The worst of
it was that he had not only boldly proclaimed his alleged discovery to
the world at large but he had even explained all about it with the well
known easy pomposity that "Science" sometimes ventures to assume. The
consequences of all this may be readily guessed. The Baltimore Gun Club
had split up immediately into two violently opposed parties. Those
gentlemen who regularly conned the scientific magazines, took every word
of the learned Professor's dispatch for gospel--or rather for something
of far higher value, and more strictly in accordance with the highly
advanced scientific developments of the day. But the others, who never
read anything but the daily papers and who could not bear the idea of
losing Barbican, laughed the whole thing to scorn. Belfast, they said,
had seen as much of the Projectile as he had of the "Open Polar Sea,"
and the rest of the dispatch was mere twaddle, though asserted with all
the sternness of a religious dogma and enveloped in the usual scientific
slang.

The meeting held in the Club House, 24 Monument Square, Baltimore, on
the evening of the 13th, had been therefore disorderly in the highest
degree. Long before the appointed hour, the great hall was densely
packed and the greatest uproar prevailed. Vice-President Wilcox took the
chair, and all was comparatively quiet until Colonel Bloomsbury, the
Honorary Secretary in Marston's absence, commenced to read Belfast's
dispatch. Then the scene, according to the account given in the next
day's _Sun_, from whose columns we condense our report, actually
"beggared description." Roars, yells, cheers, counter-cheers, clappings,
hissings, stampings, squallings, whistlings, barkings, mewings, cock
crowings, all of the most fearful and demoniacal character, turned the
immense hall into a regular pandemonium. In vain did President Wilcox
fire off his detonating bell, with a report on ordinary occasions as
loud as the roar of a small piece of ordnance. In the dreadful noise
then prevailing it was no more heard than the fizz of a lucifer match.

Some cries, however, made themselves occasionally heard in the pauses of
the din. "Read! Read!" "Dry up!" "Sit down!" "Give him an egg!" "Fair
play!" "Hurrah for Barbican!" "Down with his enemies!" "Free Speech!"
"Belfast won't bite you!" "He'd like to bite Barbican, but his teeth
aren't sharp enough!" "Barbican's a martyr to science, let's hear his
fate!" "Martyr be hanged; the Old Man is to the good yet!" "Belfast is
the grandest name in Science!" "Groans for the grandest name!" (Awful
groans.) "Three cheers for Old Man Barbican!" (The exceptional strength
alone of the walls saved the building, from being blown out by an
explosion in which at least 5,000 pairs of lungs participated.)

"Three cheers for M'Nicholl and the Frenchman!" This was followed by
another burst of cheering so hearty, vigorous and long continued that
the scientific party, or _Belfasters_ as they were now called, seeing
that further prolongation of the meet was perfectly useless, moved to
adjourn. It was carried unanimously. President Wilcox left the chair,
the meeting broke up in the wildest disorder--the scientists rather
crest fallen, but the Barbican men quite jubilant for having been so
successful in preventing the reading of that detested dispatch.

Little sleeping was done that night in Baltimore, and less business next
day. Even in the public schools so little work was done by the children
that S.T. Wallace, Esq., President of the Education Board, advised an
anticipation of the usual Christmas recess by a week. Every one talked
of the Projectile; nothing was heard at the corners but discussions
regarding its probable fate. All Baltimore was immediately rent into two
parties, the _Belfasters_ and the _Barbicanites_. The latter was the
most enthusiastic and noisy, the former decidedly the most numerous and
influential.

Science, or rather pseudo-science, always exerts a mysterious attraction
of an exceedingly powerful nature over the generality--that is, the more
ignorant portion of the human race. Assert the most absurd nonsense,
call it a scientific truth, and back it up with strange words which,
like _potentiality_, etc., sound as if they had a meaning but in
reality have none, and nine out of every ten men who read your book will
believe you. Acquire a remarkable name in one branch of human knowledge,
and presto! you are infallible in all. Who can contradict you, if you
only wrap up your assertions in specious phrases that not one man in a
million attempts to ascertain the real meaning of? We like so much to be
saved the trouble of thinking, that it is far easier and more
comfortable to be led than to contradict, to fall in quietly with the
great flock of sheep that jump blindly after their leader than to remain
apart, making one's self ridiculous by foolishly attempting to argue.
Real argument, in fact, is very difficult, for several reasons: first,
you must understand your subject _well_, which is hardly likely;
secondly, your opponent must also understand it well, which is even less
likely; thirdly, you must listen patiently to his arguments, which is
still less likely; and fourthly, he must listen to yours, the least
likely of all. If a quack advertises a panacea for all human ills at a
dollar a bottle, a hundred will buy the bottle, for one that will try
how many are killed by it. What would the investigator gain by charging
the quack with murder? Nobody would believe him, because nobody would
take the trouble to follow his arguments. His adversary, first in the
field, had gained the popular ear, and remained the unassailable master
of the situation. Our love of "Science" rests upon our admiration of
intellect, only unfortunately the intellect is too often that of other
people, not our own.

The very sound of Belfast's phrases, for instance, "satellite," "lunar
attraction," "immutable path of its orbit," etc, convinced the greater
part of the "intelligent" community that he who used them so flippantly
must be an exceedingly great man. Therefore, he had completely proved
his case. Therefore, the great majority of the ladies and gentlemen that
regularly attend the scientific lectures of the Peabody Institute,
pronounced Barbican's fate and that of his companions to be sealed. Next
morning's newspapers contained lengthy obituary notices of the Great
Balloon-attics as the witty man of the _New York Herald_ phrased it,
some of which might be considered quite complimentary. These, all
industriously copied into the evening papers, the people were carefully
reading over again, some with honest regret, some deriving a great moral
lesson from an attempt exceedingly reprehensible in every point of view,
but most, we are sorry to acknowledge, with a feeling of ill concealed
pleasure. Had not they always said how it was to end? Was there anything
more absurd ever conceived? Scientific men too! Hang such science! If
you want a real scientific man, no wind bag, no sham, take Belfast! _He_
knows what he's talking about! No taking _him_ in! Didn't he by means of
the Monster Telescope, see the Projectile, as large as life, whirling
round and round the Moon? Anyway, what else could have happened? Wasn't
it what anybody's common sense expected? Don't you remember a
conversation we had with you one day? etc., etc.

The _Barbicanites_ were very doleful, but they never though of giving
in. They would die sooner. When pressed for a scientific reply to a
scientific argument, they denied that there was any argument to reply
to. What! Had not Belfast seen the Projectile? No! Was not the Great
Telescope then good for anything? Yes, but not for everything! Did not
Belfast know his business? No! Did they mean to say that he had seen
nothing at all? Well, not exactly that, but those scientific gentlemen
can seldom be trusted; in their rage for discovery, they make a mountain
out of a molehill, or, what is worse, they start a theory and then
distort facts to support it. Answers of this kind either led directly to
a fight, or the _Belfasters_ moved away thoroughly disgusted with the
ignorance of their opponents, who could not see a chain of reasoning as
bright as the noonday sun.

Things were in this feverish state on the evening of the 14th, when, all
at once, Bloomsbury's dispatch arrived in Baltimore. I need not say that
it dropped like a spark in a keg of gun powder. The first question all
asked was: Is it genuine or bogus? real or got up by the stockbrokers?
But a few flashes backwards and forwards over the wires soon settled
that point. The stunning effects of the new blow were hardly over when
the _Barbicanites_ began to perceive that the wonderful intelligence was
decidedly in their favor. Was it not a distinct contradiction of the
whole story told by their opponents? If Barbican and his friends were
lying at the bottom of the Pacific, they were certainly not
circumgyrating around the Moon. If it was the Projectile that had broken
off the bowsprit of the _Susquehanna_, it could not certainly be the
Projectile that Belfast had seen only the day previous doing the duty
of a satellite. Did not the truth of one incident render the other an
absolute impossibility? If Bloomsbury was right, was not Belfast an ass?
Hurrah!

The new revelation did not improve poor Barbican's fate a bit--no matter
for that! Did not the _party_ gain by it? What would the _Belfasters_
say now? Would not they hold down their heads in confusion and disgrace?

The _Belfasters_, with a versatility highly creditable to human nature,
did nothing of the kind. Rapidly adopting the very line of tactics they
had just been so severely censuring, they simply denied the whole thing.
What! the truth of the Bloomsbury dispatch? Yes, every word of it! Had
not Bloomsbury seen the Projectile? No! Were not his eyes good for
anything? Yes, but not for everything! Did not the Captain know his
business? No! Did they mean to say that the bowsprit of the
_Susquehanna_ had not been broken off? Well, not exactly that, but those
naval gentlemen are not always to be trusted; after a pleasant little
supper, they often see the wrong light-house, or, what is worse, in
their desire to shield their negligence from censure, they dodge the
blame by trying to show that the accident was unavoidable. The
_Susquehanna's_ bowsprit had been snapped off, in all probability, by
some sudden squall, or, what was still more likely, some little aerolite
had struck it and frightened the crew into fits. When answers of this
kind did not lead to blows, the case was an exceptional one indeed. The
contestants were so numerous and so excited that the police at last
began to think of letting them fight it out without any interference.
Marshal O'Kane, though ably assisted by his 12 officers and 500
patrolmen, had a terrible time of it. The most respectable men in
Baltimore, with eyes blackened, noses bleeding, and collars torn, saw
the inside of a prison that night for the first time in all their lives.
Men that even the Great War had left the warmest of friends, now abused
each other like fishwomen. The prison could not hold the half of those
arrested. They were all, however, discharged next morning, for the
simple reason that the Mayor and the aldermen had been themselves
engaged in so many pugilistic combats during the night that they were
altogether disabled from attending to their magisterial duties next day.

Our readers, however, may be quite assured that, even in the wildest
whirl of the tremendous excitement around them, all the members of the
Baltimore Gun Club did not lose their heads. In spite of the determined
opposition of the _Belfasters_ who would not allow the Bloomsbury
dispatch to be read at the special meeting called that evening, a few
succeeded in adjourning to a committee-room, where Joseph Wilcox, Esq.,
presiding, our old friends Colonel Bloomsbury, Major Elphinstone, Tom
Hunter, Billsby the brave, General Morgan, Chief Engineer John Murphy,
and about as many more as were sufficient to form a quorum, declared
themselves to be in regular session, and proceeded quietly to debate on
the nature of Captain Bloomsbury's dispatch.

Was it of a nature to justify immediate action or not? Decided
unanimously in the affirmative. Why so? Because, whether actually true
or untrue, the incident it announced was not impossible. Had it indeed
announced the Projectile to have fallen in California or in South
America, there would have been good valid reasons to question its
accuracy. But by taking into consideration the Moon's distance, and the
time elapsed between the moment of the start and that of the presumed
fall (about 10 days), and also the Earth's revolution in the meantime,
it was soon calculated that the point at which the Projectile should
strike our globe, if it struck it at all, would be somewhere about 27°
north latitude, and 42° west longitude--the very identical spot given in
the Captain's dispatch! This certainly was a strong point in its favor,
especially as there was positively nothing valid whatever to urge
against it.

A decided resolution was therefore immediately taken. Everything that
man could do was to be done at once, in order to fish up their brave
associates from the depths of the Pacific. That very night, in fact,
whilst the streets of Baltimore were still resounding with the yells of
contending _Belfasters_ and _Barbicanites_, a committee of four, Morgan,
Hunter, Murphy, and Elphinstone, were speeding over the Alleghanies in a
special train, placed at their disposal by the _Baltimore and Ohio
Railroad Company_, and fast enough to land them in Chicago pretty early
on the following evening.

Here a fresh locomotive and a Pullman car taking charge of them, they
were whirled off to Omaha, reaching that busy locality at about supper
time on the evening of December 16th. The Pacific Train, as it was
called though at that time running no further west than Julesburg,
instead of waiting for the regular hour of starting, fired up that very
night, and was soon pulling the famous Baltimore Club men up the slopes
of the Nebraska at the rate of forty miles an hour. They were awakened
before light next morning by the guard, who told them that Julesburg,
which they were just entering, was the last point so far reached by the
rails. But their regret at this circumstance was most unexpectedly and
joyfully interrupted by finding their hands warmly clasped and their
names cheerily cried out by their old and beloved friend, J.T. Marston,
the illustrious Secretary of the Baltimore Gun Club.

At the close of the first volume of our entertaining and veracious
history, we left this most devoted friend and admirer of Barbican
established firmly at his post on the summit of Long's Peak, beside the
Great Telescope, watching the skies, night and day, for some traces of
his departed friends. There, as the gracious Reader will also remember,
he had come a little too late to catch that sight of the Projectile
which Belfast had at first reported so confidently, but of which the
Professor by degrees had begun to entertain the most serious doubts.

In these doubts, however, Marston, strange to say, would not permit
himself for one moment to share. Belfast might shake his head as much as
he pleased; he, Marston, was no fickle reed to be shaken by every wind;
he firmly believed the Projectile to be there before him, actually in
sight, if he could only see it. All the long night of the 13th, and even
for several hours of the 14th, he never quitted the telescope for a
single instant. The midnight sky was in magnificent order; not a speck
dimmed its azure of an intensely dark tint. The stars blazed out like
fires; the Moon refused none of her secrets to the scientists who were
gazing at her so intently that night from the platform on the summit of
Long's Peak. But no black spot crawling over her resplendent surface
rewarded their eager gaze. Marston indeed would occasionally utter a
joyful cry announcing some discovery, but in a moment after he was
confessing with groans that it was all a false alarm. Towards morning,
Belfast gave up in despair and went to take a sleep; but no sleep for
Marston. Though he was now quite alone, the assistants having also
retired, he kept on talking incessantly to himself, expressing the most
unbounded confidence in the safety of his friends, and the absolute
certainty of their return. It was not until some hours after the Sun
had risen and the Moon had disappeared behind the snowy peaks of the
west, that he at last withdrew his weary eye from the glass through
which every image formed by the great reflector was to be viewed. The
countenance he turned on Belfast, who had now come back, was rueful in
the extreme. It was the image of grief and despair.

"Did you see nothing whatever during the night, Professor?" he asked of
Belfast, though he knew very well the answer he was to get.

"Nothing whatever."

"But you saw them once, didn't you?"

"Them! Who?"

"Our friends."

"Oh! the Projectile--well--I think I must have made some oversight."

"Don't say that! Did not Mr. M'Connell see it also?"

"No. He only wrote out what I dictated."

"Why, you must have seen it! I have seen it myself!"

"You shall never see it again! It's shot off into space."

"You're as wrong now as you thought you were right yesterday."

"I'm sorry to say I was wrong yesterday; but I have every reason to
believe I'm right to-day."

"We shall see! Wait till to-night!"

"To-night! Too late! As far as the Projectile is concerned, night is now
no better than day."

The learned Professor was quite right, but in a way which he did not
exactly expect. That very evening, after a weary day, apparently a month
long, during which Marston sought in vain for a few hours' repose, just
as all hands, well wrapped up in warm furs, were getting ready to assume
their posts once more near the mouth of the gigantic Telescope, Mr.
M'Connell hastily presented himself with a dispatch for Belfast.

The Professor was listlessly breaking the envelope, when he uttered a
sharp cry of surprise.

"Hey!" cried Marston quickly. "What's up now?"

"Oh!! The Pro--pro--projectile!!"

"What of it? What? Oh what?? Speak!!"

"IT'S BACK!!"

Marston uttered a wild yell of mingled horror, surprise, and joy, jumped
a little into the air, and then fell flat and motionless on the
platform. Had Belfast shot him with a ten pound weight, right between
the two eyes, he could not have knocked him flatter or stiffer. Having
neither slept all night, nor eaten all day, the poor fellow's system had
become so weak that such unexpected news was really more than he could
bear. Besides, as one of the Cambridge men of the party, a young medical
student, remarked: the thin, cold air of these high mountains was
extremely enervating.

The astronomers, all exceedingly alarmed, did what they could to recover
their friend from his fit, but it was nearly ten minutes before they had
the satisfaction of seeing his limbs moving with a slight quiver and
his breast beginning to heave. At last the color came back to his face
and his eyes opened. He stared around for a few seconds at his friends,
evidently unconscious, but his senses were not long in returning.

"Say!" he uttered at last in a faint voice.

"Well!" replied Belfast.

"Where is that infernal Pro--pro--jectile?"

"In the Pacific Ocean."

"What??"

He was on his feet in an instant.

"Say that again!"

"In the Pacific Ocean."

"Hurrah! All right! Old Barbican's not made into mincemeat yet! No,
sirree! Let's start!"

"Where for?"

"San Francisco!"

"When?"

"This instant!"

"In the dark?"

"We shall soon have the light of the Moon! Curse her! it's the least she
can do after all the trouble she has given us!"




CHAPTER XXII.

ON THE WINGS OF THE WIND.


Leaving M'Connell and a few other Cambridge men to take charge of the
Great Telescope, Marston and Belfast in little more than an hour after
the receipt of the exciting dispatch, were scudding down the slopes of
Long's Peak by the only possible route--the inclined railroad. This
mode of travelling, however, highly satisfactory as far as it went,
ceased altogether at the mountain foot, at the point where the Dale
River formed a junction with Cache la Poudre Creek. But Marston, having
already mapped out the whole journey with some care and forethought, was
ready for almost every emergency. Instinctively feeling that the first
act of the Baltimore Gun Club would be to send a Committee to San
Francisco to investigate matters, he had determined to meet this
deputation on the route, and his only trouble now was to determine at
what point he would be most likely to catch them. His great start, he
knew perfectly well, could not put him more than a day in advance of
them: they having the advantage of a railroad nearly all the way, whilst
himself and Belfast could not help losing much time in struggling
through ravines, canyons, mountain precipices, and densely tangled
forests, not to mention the possibility of a brush or two with prowling
Indians, before they could strike the line of the Pacific Railroad,
along which he knew the Club men to be approaching. After a few hours
rest at La Porte, a little settlement lately started in the valley,
early in the morning they took the stage that passed through from Denver
to Cheyenne, a town at that time hardly a year old but already
flourishing, with a busy population of several thousand inhabitants.

Losing not a moment at Cheyenne, where they arrived much sooner than
they had anticipated, they took places in Wells, Fargo and Co.'s
_Overland Stage Mail_ bound east, and were soon flying towards Julesburg
at the rate of twelve miles an hour. Here Marston was anxious to meet
the Club men, as at this point the Pacific Railroad divided into two
branches--one bearing north, the other south of the Great Salt Lake
--and he feared they might take the wrong one.

But he arrived in Julesburg fully 10 hours before the Committee, so that
himself and Belfast had not only ample time to rest a little after their
rapid flight from Long's Peak, but also to make every possible
preparation for the terrible journey of more than fifteen hundred miles
that still lay before them.

This journey, undertaken at a most unseasonable period of the year, and
over one of the most terrible deserts in the world, would require a
volume for itself. Constantly presenting the sharpest points of contrast
between the most savage features of wild barbaric nature on the one
hand, and the most touching traits of the sweetest humanity on the
other, the story of our Club men's adventures, if only well told, could
hardly fail to be highly interesting. But instead of a volume, we can
give it only a chapter, and that a short one.

From Julesburg, the last station on the eastern end of the Pacific
Railroad, to Cisco, the last station on its western end, the distance is
probably about fifteen hundred miles, about as far as Constantinople is
from London, or Moscow from Paris. This enormous stretch of country had
to be travelled all the way by, at the best, a six horse stage tearing
along night and day at a uniform rate, road or no road, of ten miles an
hour. But this was the least of the trouble. Bands of hostile Indians
were a constant source of watchfulness and trouble, against which even a
most liberal stock of rifles and revolvers were not always a
reassurance. Whirlwinds of dust often overwhelmed the travellers so
completely that they could hardly tell day from night, whilst blasts of
icy chill, sweeping down from the snowy peaks of the Rocky Mountains,
often made them imagine themselves in the midst of the horrors of an
Arctic winter.

The predominant scenery gave no pleasure to the eye or exhilaration to
the mind. It was of the dreariest description. Days and days passed with
hardly a house to be seen, or a tree or a blade of grass. I might even
add, or a mountain or a river, for the one was too often a heap of
agglomerated sand and clay cut into unsightly chasms by the rain, and
the other generally degenerated into a mere stagnant swamp, its
shallowness and dryness increasing regularly with its length. The only
houses were log ranches, called Relays, hardly visible in their sandy
surroundings, and separate from each other by a mean distance of ten
miles. The only trees were either stunted cedars, so far apart, as to be
often denominated Lone Trees; and, besides wormwood, the only plant was
the sage plant, about two feet high, gray, dry, crisp, and emitting a
sharp pungent odor by no means pleasant.

In fact, Barbican and his companions had seen nothing drearier or
savager in the dreariest and savagest of lunar landscapes than the
scenes occasionally presented to Marston and his friends in their
headlong journey on the track of the great Pacific Railroad. Here,
bowlders, high, square, straight and plumb as an immense hotel, blocked
up your way; there, lay an endless level, flat as the palm of your hand,
over which your eye might roam in vain in search of something green like
a meadow, yellow like a cornfield, or black like ploughed ground--a mere
boundless waste of dirty white from the stunted wormwood, often rendered
misty with the clouds of smarting alkali dust.

Occasionally, however, this savage scenery decidedly changed its
character. Now, a lovely glen would smile before our travellers,
traversed by tinkling streams, waving with sweet grasses, dotted with
little groves, alive with hares, antelopes, and even elks, but
apparently never yet trodden by the foot of man. Now, our Club men felt
like travelling on clouds, as they careered along the great plateau
west of the Black Hills, fully 8,000 feet above the level of the sea,
though even there the grass was as green and fresh as if it grew in some
sequestered valley of Pennsylvania. Again,

    "In this untravelled world whose margin fades
    For ever and for ever as they moved,"

they would find themselves in an immense, tawny, treeless plain,
outlined by mountains so distant as to resemble fantastic cloud piles.
Here for days they would have to skirt the coasts of a Lake, vast,
unruffled, unrippled, apparently of metallic consistency, from whose
sapphire depths rose pyramidal islands to a height of fully three
thousand feet above the surface.

In a few days all would change. No more sand wastes, salt water flats,
or clouds of blinding alkali dust. The travellers' road, at the foot of
black precipitous cliffs, would wind along the brink of a roaring
torrent, whose devious course would lead them into the heart of the
Sierras, where misty peaks solemnly sentinelled the nestling vales still
smiling in genial summer verdure. Across these they were often whirled
through immense forests of varied character, here dense enough to
obscure the track, there swaying in the sweet sunlight and vocal with
joyous birds of bright and gorgeous plumage. Then tropical vegetation
would completely hide the trail, crystal lakes would obstruct it,
cascades shooting down from perpendicular rocks would obliterate it,
mountain passes barricaded by basaltic columns would render it
uncertain, and on one occasion it was completely covered up by a fall of
snow to a depth of more than twenty feet.

But nothing could oppose serious delay to our travellers. Their motto
was ever "onward!" and what they lost in one hour by some mishap they
endeavored to recover on the next by redoubled speed. They felt that
they would be no friends of Barbican's if they were discouraged by
impossibilities. Besides, what would have been real impossibilities at
another time, several concurrent circumstances now rendered
comparatively easy.

The surveys, the gradings, the cuttings, and the other preliminary
labors in the great Pacific Railroad, gave them incalculable aid.
Horses, help, carriages, provisions were always in abundance. Their
object being well known, they had the best wishes of every hand on the
road. People remained up for them all hours of the night, no matter at
what station they were expected. The warmest and most comfortable of
meals were always ready for them, for which no charge would be taken on
any account. In Utah, a deputation of Mormons galloped alongside them
for forty miles to help them over some points of the road that had been
often found difficult. The season was the finest known for many years.
In short, as an old Californian said as he saw them shooting over the
rickety bridge that crossed the Bear River at Corinne: "they had
everything in their favor--_luck_ as well as _pluck_!"

The rate at which they performed this terrible ride across the
Continent and the progress they made each day, some readers may consider
worthy of a few more items for the sake of future reference. Discarding
the ordinary overland mail stage as altogether too slow for their
purpose, they hired at Julesburg a strong, well built carriage, large
enough to hold them all comfortably; but this they had to replace twice
before they came to their journey's end. Their team always consisted of
the best six horses that could be found, and their driver was the famous
Hank Monk of California, who, happening to be in Julesburg about that
time, volunteered to see them safely landed in Cisco on the summit of
the Sierra Nevada. They were enabled to change horses as near as
possible every hour, by telegraphing ahead in the morning, during the
day, and often far into the hours of night.

Starting from Julesburg early in the morning of the 17th, their first
resting place for a few hours at night was Granite Canyon, twenty miles
west of Cheyenne, and just at the foot of the pass over the Black Hills.
On the 18th, night-fall found them entering St. Mary's, at the further
end of the pass between Rattle Snake Hills and Elk Mountain. It was
after 5 o'clock and already dark on the 19th, when the travellers,
hurrying with all speed through the gloomy gorge of slate formation
leading to the banks of the Green River, found the ford too deep to be
ventured before morning. The 20th was a clear cold day very favorable
for brisk locomotion, and the bright sun had not quite disappeared
behind the Wahsatch Mountains when the Club men, having crossed the
Bear River, began to leave the lofty plateau of the Rocky Mountains by
the great inclined plane marked by the lines of the Echo and the Weber
Rivers on their way to the valley of the Great American Desert.

Quitting Castle Rock early on the morning of the 21st, they soon came in
sight of the Great Salt Lake, along the northern shores of which they
sped all day, taking shelter after night-fall at Terrace, in a miserable
log cabin surrounded by piles of drifting sand. The 22d was a terrible
day. The sand was blinding, the alkali dust choking, the ride for five
or six hours was up considerable grade; still they had accomplished
their 150 miles before resting for the night at Elko, even at this
period a flourishing little village on the banks of the Humboldt. After
another smothering ride on the 23d, they rested, at Winnemucca, another
flourishing village, situated at the precise point in the desert where
the Little Humboldt joins Humboldt River, without, however, making the
channel fuller or wider. The 24th was decidedly the hardest day, their
course lying through the worst part of the terrible Nevada desert. But a
glimpse of the Sierras looming in the western horizon gave them courage
and strength enough to reach Wadsworth, at their foot, a little before
midnight. Our travellers had now but one day's journey more to make
before reaching the railroad at Cisco, but, this being a very steep
ascent nearly all the way up, each mile cost almost twice as much time
and exertion.

At last, late in the evening of Christmas Day, amidst the most
enthusiastic cheers of all the inhabitants of Cisco, who welcomed them
with a splendid pine brand procession, Marston and his friends,
thoroughly used up, feet swelled, limbs bruised, bones aching, stomachs
seasick, eyes bleared, ears ringing, and brains on fire for want of
rest, took their places in the State Car waiting for them, and started
without a moment's delay for Sacramento, about a hundred miles distant.
How delicious was the change to our poor travellers! Washed, refreshed,
and lying at full length on luxurious sofas, their sensations, as the
locomotive spun them down the ringing grooves of the steep Sierras, can
be more easily imagined than described. They were all fast asleep when
the train entered Sacramento, but the Mayor and the other city
authorities who had waited up to receive them, had them carried
carefully, so as not to disturb their slumbers, on board the _Yo
Semite_, a fine steamer belonging to the California Navigation Company,
which landed them safely at San Francisco about noon on the 26th, after
accomplishing the extraordinary winter journey of 1500 miles over land
in little more than nine days, only about 200 miles being done by steam.

Half-past two P.M. found our travellers bathed, dressed, shaved, dined,
and ready to receive company in the grand parlor of the _Occidental
Hotel_. Captain Bloomsbury was the first to call.

Marston hobbled eagerly towards him and asked:

"What have you done towards fishing them up, Captain?"

"A good deal, Mr. Marston; indeed almost everything is ready."

"Is that really the case, Captain?" asked all, very agreeably surprised.

"Yes, gentlemen, I am most happy to state that I am quite in earnest."

"Can we start to-morrow?" asked General Morgan. "We have not a moment to
spare, you know."

"We can start at noon to-morrow at latest," replied the Captain, "if the
foundry men do a little extra work to-night."

"We must start this very day, Captain Bloomsbury," cried Marston
resolutely; "Barbican has been lying two weeks and thirteen hours in the
depths of the Pacific! If he is still alive, no thanks to Marston! He
must by this time have given me up! The grappling irons must be got on
board at once, Captain, and let us start this evening!"

At half-past four that very evening, a shot from the Fort and a lowering
of the Stars and Stripes from its flagstaff saluted the _Susquehanna_,
as she steamed proudly out of the Golden Gate at the lively rate of
fifteen knots an hour.




CHAPTER XXIII.

THE CLUB MEN GO A FISHING.


Captain Bloomsbury was perfectly right when he said that almost
everything was ready for the commencement of the great work which the
Club men had to accomplish. Considering how much was required, this was
certainly saying a great deal; but here also, as on many other
occasions, fortune had singularly favored the Club men.

San Francisco Bay, as everybody knows, though one of the finest and
safest harbors in the world, is not without some danger from hidden
rocks. One of these in particular, the Anita Rock as it was called,
lying right in mid channel, had become so notorious for the wrecks of
which it was the cause, that, after much time spent in the consideration
of the subject, the authorities had at last determined to blow it up.
This undertaking having been very satisfactorily accomplished by means
of _dynamite_ or giant powder, another improvement in the harbor had
been also undertaken with great success. The wrecks of many vessels lay
scattered here and there pretty numerously, some, like that of the
_Flying Dragon_, in spots so shallow that they could be easily seen at
low water, but others sunk at least twenty fathoms deep, like that of
the _Caroline_, which had gone down in 1851, not far from Blossom Rock,
with a treasure on board of 20,000 ounces of gold. The attempt to clear
away these wrecks had also turned out very well; even sufficient
treasure had been recovered to repay all the expense, though the
preparations for the purpose by the contractors, M'Gowan and Co. had
been made on the most extensive scale, and in accordance with the latest
improvements in the apparatus for submarine operations.

Buoys, made of huge canvas sacks, coated with India rubber, and guarded
by a net work of strong cordage, had been manufactured and provided by
the _New York Submarine Company_. These buoys, when inflated and working
in pairs, had a lifting capacity of 30 tons a pair. Reservoirs of air,
provided with powerful compression pumps, always accompanied the buoys.
To attach the latter, in a collapsed condition, with strong chains to
the sides of the vessels which were to be lifted, a diving apparatus was
necessary. This also the _New York Company_ had provided, and it was so
perfect in its way that, by means of peculiar appliances of easy
management, the diver could walk about on the bottom, take his own
bearings, ascend to the surface at pleasure, and open his helmet without
assistance. A few sets likewise of Rouquayrol and Denayrouze's famous
submarine armor had been provided. These would prove of invaluable
advantage in all operations performed at great sea depths, as its
distinctive feature, "the regulator," could maintain, what is not done
by any other diving armor, a constant equality of pressure on the lungs
between the external and the internal air.

But perhaps the most useful article of all was a new form of diving bell
called the _Nautilus_, a kind of submarine boat, capable of lateral as
well as vertical movement at the will of its occupants. Constructed with
double sides, the intervening chambers could be filled either with water
or air according as descent or ascent was required. A proper supply of
water enabled the machine to descend to depths impossible to be reached
otherwise; this water could then be expelled by an ingenious
contrivance, which, replacing it with air, enabled the diver to rise
towards the surface as fast as he pleased.

All these and many other portions of the submarine apparatus which had
been employed that very year for clearing the channel, lifting the
wrecks and recovering the treasure, lay now at San Francisco, unused
fortunately on account of the season of the year, and therefore they
could be readily obtained for the asking. They had even been generously
offered to Captain Bloomsbury, who, in obedience to a telegram from
Washington, had kept his crew busily employed for nearly two weeks
night and day in transferring them all safely on board the
_Susquehanna_.

Marston was the first to make a careful inspection of every article
intended for the operation.

"Do you consider these buoys powerful enough to lift the Projectile,
Captain?" he asked next morning, as the vessel was briskly heading
southward, at a distance of ten or twelve miles from the coast on their
left.

"You can easily calculate that problem yourself, Mr. Marston," replied
the Captain. "It presents no difficulty. The Projectile weighs about 20
thousand pounds, or 10 tons?"

"Correct!"

"Well, a pair of these buoys when inflated can raise a weight of 30
tons."

"So far so good. But how do you propose attaching them to the
Projectile?"

"We simply let them descend in a state of collapse; the diver, going
down with them, will have no difficulty in making a fast connection. As
soon as they are inflated the Projectile will come up like a cork."

"Can the divers readily reach such depths?"

"That remains to be seen Mr. Marston."

"Captain," said Morgan, now joining the party, "you are a worthy member
of our Gun Club. You have done wonders. Heaven grant it may not be all
in vain! Who knows if our poor friends are still alive?"

"Hush!" cried Marston quickly. "Have more sense than to ask such
questions. Is Barbican alive! Am _I_ alive? They're all alive, I tell
you, only we must be quick about reaching them before the air gives out.
That's what's the matter! Air! Provisions, water--abundance! But
air--oh! that's their weak point! Quick, Captain, quick--They're
throwing the reel--I must see her rate!" So saying, he hurried off to
the stern, followed by General Morgan. Chief Engineer Murphy and the
Captain of the _Susquehanna_ were thus left for awhile together.

These two men had a long talk on the object of their journey and the
likelihood of anything satisfactory being accomplished. The man of the
sea candidly acknowledged his apprehensions. He had done everything in
his power towards collecting suitable machinery for fishing up the
Projectile, but he had done it all, he said, more as a matter of duty
than because he believed that any good could result from it; in fact, he
never expected to see the bold adventurers again either living or dead.
Murphy, who well understood not only what machinery was capable of
effecting, but also what it would surely fail in, at first expressed the
greatest confidence in the prosperous issue of the undertaking. But when
he learned, as he now did for the first time, that the ocean bed on
which the Projectile was lying could be hardly less than 20,000 feet
below the surface, he assumed a countenance as grave as the Captain's,
and at once confessed that, unless their usual luck stood by them, his
poor friends had not the slightest possible chance of ever being fished
up from the depths of the Pacific.

The conversation maintained among the officers and the others on board
the _Susquehanna_, was pretty much of the same nature. It is almost
needless to say that all heads--except Belfast's, whose scientific mind
rejected the Projectile theory with the most serene contempt--were
filled with the same idea, all hearts throbbed with the same emotion.
Wouldn't it be glorious to fish them up alive and well? What were they
doing just now? Doing? _Doing!_ Their bodies most probably were lying in
a shapeless pile on the floor of the Projectile, like a heap of clothes,
the uppermost man being the last smothered; or perhaps floating about in
the water inside the Projectile, like dead gold fish in an aquarium; or
perhaps burned to a cinder, like papers in a "champion" safe after a
great fire; or, who knows? perhaps at that very moment the poor fellows
were making their last and almost superhuman struggles to burst their
watery prison and ascend once more into the cheerful regions of light
and air! Alas! How vain must such puny efforts prove! Plunged into ocean
depths of three or four miles beneath the surface, subjected to an
inconceivable pressure of millions and millions of tons of sea water,
their metallic shroud was utterly unassailable from within, and utterly
unapproachable from without!

Early on the morning of December 29th, the Captain calculating from his
log that they must now be very near the spot where they had witnessed
the extraordinary phenomenon, the _Susquehanna_ hove to. Having to wait
till noon to find his exact position, he ordered the steamer to take a
short circular course of a few hours' duration, in hope of sighting the
buoy. But though at least a hundred telescopes scanned the calm ocean
breast for many miles in all directions, it was nowhere to be seen.

Precisely at noon, aided by his officers and in the presence of
Marston, Belfast, and the Gun Club Committee, the Captain took his
observations. After a moment or two of the most profound interest, it
was a great gratification to all to learn that the _Susquehanna_ was on
the right parallel, and only about 15 miles west of the precise spot
where the Projectile had disappeared beneath the waves. The steamer
started at once in the direction indicated, and a minute or two before
one o'clock the Captain said they were "there." No sign of the buoy
could yet be seen in any direction; it had probably been drifted
southward by the Mexican coast current which slowly glides along these
shores from December to April.

"At last!" cried Marston, with a sigh of great relief.

"Shall we commence at once?" asked the Captain.

"Without losing the twenty thousandth part of a second!" answered
Marston; "life or death depends upon our dispatch!"

The _Susquehanna_ again hove to, and this time all possible precautions
were taken to keep her in a state of perfect immobility--an operation
easily accomplished in these pacific latitudes, where cloud and wind and
water are often as motionless as if all life had died out of the world.
In fact, as the boats were quietly lowered, preparatory for beginning
the operations, the mirror like calmness of sea, sky, and ship so
impressed the Doctor, who was of a poetical turn of mind, that he could
not help exclaiming to the little Midshipman, who was standing nearest:

"Coleridge realized, with variations:

    The breeze drops down, the sail drops down,
      All's still as still can be;
    If we speak, it is only to break
      The silence of the sea.
    Still are the clouds, still are the shrouds,
      No life, no breath, no motion;
    Idle are all as a painted ship
      Upon a painted ocean!"

Chief Engineer Murphy now took command. Before letting down the buoys,
the first thing evidently to be done was to find out, if possible, the
precise point where the Projectile lay. For this purpose, the Nautilus
was clearly the only part of the machinery that could be employed with
advantage. Its chambers were accordingly soon filled with water, its air
reservoirs were also soon completely charged, and the Nautilus itself,
suspended by chains from the end of a yard, lay quietly on the ocean
surface, its manhole on the top remaining open for the reception of
those who were willing to encounter the dangers that awaited it in the
fearful depths of the Pacific. Every one looking on was well aware that,
after a few hundred feet below the surface, the pressure would grow more
and more enormous, until at last it became quite doubtful if any line
could bear the tremendous strain. It was even possible that at a certain
depth the walls of the Nautilus might be crushed in like an eggshell,
and the whole machine made as flat as two leaves of paper pasted
together.

Perfectly conscious of the nature of the tremendous risk they were about
to run, Marston, Morgan, and Murphy quietly bade their friends a short
farewell and were lowered into the manhole. The Nautilus having room
enough for four, Belfast had been expected to be of the party but,
feeling a little sea sick, the Professor backed out at the last moment,
to the great joy of Mr. Watkins, the famous reporter of the _N.Y.
Herald_, who was immediately allowed to take his place.

Every provision against immediate danger had been made. By means of
preconcerted signals, the inmates could have themselves drawn up, let
down, or carried laterally in whatever direction they pleased. By
barometers and other instruments they could readily ascertain the
pressure of the air and water, also how far they had descended and at
what rate they were moving. The Captain, from his bridge, carefully
superintended every detail of the operation. All signals he insisted on
attending to himself personally, transmitting them instantly by his bell
to the engineer below. The whole power of the steam engine had been
brought to bear on the windlass; the chains could withstand an enormous
strain. The wheels had been carefully oiled and tested beforehand; the
signalling apparatus had been subjected to the rigidest examination; and
every portion of the machinery had been proved to be in admirable
working order.

The chances of immediate and unforeseen danger, it is true, had been
somewhat diminished by all these precautions. The risk, nevertheless,
was fearful. The slightest accident or even carelessness might easily
lead to the most disastrous consequence.

Five minutes after two o'clock, the manhole being closed, the lamps lit,
and everything pronounced all right, the signal for the descent was
given, and the Nautilus immediately disappeared beneath the waters. A
double anxiety now possessed all on board the _Susquehanna_: the
prisoners in the Nautilus were in danger as well as the prisoners in the
Projectile. Marston and his friends, however, were anything but
disquieted on their own account, and, pencil in hand and noses flattened
on the glass plates, they examined carefully everything they could see
in the liquid masses through which they were descending.

For the first five hundred feet, the descent was accomplished with
little trouble. The Nautilus sank rather slowly, at a uniform rate of a
foot to the second. It had not been two minutes under water when the
light of day completely disappeared. But for this the occupants were
fully prepared, having provided themselves with powerful lamps, whose
brilliant light, radiating from polished reflectors, gave them an
opportunity of seeing clearly around it for a distance of eight or ten
feet in all directions. Owing to the superlatively excellent
construction of the Nautilus, also on account of the _scaphanders_, or
suits of diving armor, with which Marston and his friends had clothed
themselves, the disagreeable sensations to which divers are ordinarily
exposed, were hardly felt at all in the beginning of the descent.

Marston was about to congratulate his companions on the favorable
auspices inaugurating their trip, when Murphy, consulting the
instrument, discovered to his great surprise that the Nautilus was not
making its time. In reply to their signal "faster!" the downward
movement increased a little, but it soon relaxed again. Instead of less
than two minutes, as at the beginning, it now took twelve minutes to
make a hundred feet. They had gone only seven hundred feet in
thirty-seven minutes. In spite of repeated signalling, their progress
during the next hour was even still more alarming, one hundred feet
taking exactly 59 minutes. To shorten detail, it required two hours more
to make another hundred feet; and then the Nautilus, after taking ten
minutes to crawl an inch further, came to a perfect stand still. The
pressure of the water had evidently now become too enormous to allow
further descent.

The Clubmen's distress was very great; Marston's, in particular, was
indescribable. In vain, catching at straws, he signalled "eastwards!"
"westwards!" "northwards!" or "southwards!" the Nautilus moved readily
every way but downwards.

"Oh! what shall we do?" he cried in despair; "Barbican, must we really
give you up though separated from us by the short distance of only a few
miles?"

At last, nothing better being to be done, the unwilling signal "heave
upwards!" was given, and the hauling up commenced. It was done very
slowly, and with the greatest care. A sudden jerk might snap the chains;
an incautious twist might put a kink on the air tube; besides, it was
well known that the sudden removal of heavy pressure resulting from
rapid ascent, is attended by very disagreeable sensations, which have
sometimes even proved fatal.

It was near midnight when the Clubmen were lifted out of the manhole.
Their faces were pale, their eyes bloodshot, their figures stooped. Even
the _Herald_ Reporter seemed to have got enough of exploring. But
Marston was as confident as ever, and tried to be as brisk.

He had hardly swallowed the refreshment so positively enjoined in the
circumstances, when he abruptly addressed the Captain:

"What's the weight of your heaviest cannon balls?"

"Thirty pounds, Mr. Marston."

"Can't you attach thirty of them to the Nautilus and sink us again?"

"Certainly, Mr. Marston, if you wish it. It shall be the first thing
done to-morrow."

"To-night, Captain! At once! Barbican has not an instant to lose."

"At once then be it, Mr. Marston. Just as you say."

The new sinkers were soon attached to the Nautilus, which disappeared
once more with all its former occupants inside, except the _Herald_
Reporter, who had fallen asleep over his notes, or at least seemed to
be. He had probably made up his mind as to the likelihood of the
Nautilus ever getting back again.

The second descent was quicker than the first, but just as futile. At
1152 feet, the Nautilus positively refused to go a single inch further.
Marston looked like a man in a stupor. He made no objection to the
signal given by the others to return; he even helped to cut the ropes by
which the cannon balls had been attached. Not a single word was spoken
by the party, as they slowly rose to the surface. Marston seemed to be
struggling against despair. For the first time, the impossibility of the
great enterprise seemed to dawn upon him. He and his friends had
undertaken a great fight with the mighty Ocean, which now played with
them as a giant with a pigmy. To reach the bottom was evidently
completely out of their power; and what was infinitely worse, there was
nothing to be gained by reaching it. The Projectile was not on the
bottom; it could not even have got to the bottom. Marston said it all in
a few words to the Captain, as the Clubmen stepped on deck a few hours
later:

"Barbican is floating midway in the depths of the Pacific, like Mahomet
in his coffin!"

Blindly yielding, however, to the melancholy hope that is born of
despair, Marston and his friends renewed the search next day, the 30th,
but they were all too worn out with watching and excitement to be able
to continue it longer than a few hours. After a night's rest, it was
renewed the day following, the 31st, with some vigor, and a good part of
the ocean lying between Guadalupe and Benito islands was carefully
investigated to a depth of seven or eight hundred feet. No traces
whatever of the Projectile. Several California steamers, plying between
San Francisco and Panama, passed the _Susquehanna_ within hailing
distance. But to every question, the invariable reply one melancholy
burden bore:

"No luck!"

All hands were now in despair. Marston could neither eat nor drink. He
never even spoke the whole day, except on two occasions. Once, when
somebody heard him muttering:

"He's now seventeen days in the ocean!"

The second time he spoke, the words seemed to be forced out of him.
Belfast admitted, for the sake of argument, that the Projectile had
fallen into the ocean, but he strongly denounced the absurd idea of its
occupants being still alive. "Under such circumstances," went on the
learned Professor, "further prolongation of vital energy would be simply
impossible. Want of air, want of food, want of courage--"

"No, sir!" interrupted Marston quite savagely. "Want of air, of meat, of
drink, as much as you like! But when you speak of Barbican's want of
courage, you don't know what you are talking about! No holy martyr ever
died at the stake with a loftier courage than my noble friend
Barbican!"

That night he asked the Captain if he would not sail down as far as Cape
San Lucas. Bloomsbury saw that further search was all labor lost, but he
respected such heroic grief too highly to give a positive refusal. He
consented to devote the following day, New Year's, to an exploring
expedition as far as Magdalena Bay, making the most diligent inquiries
in all directions.

But New Year's was just as barren of results as any of its predecessors,
and, a little before sunset, Captain Bloomsbury, regardless of further
entreaties and unwilling to risk further delay, gave orders to 'bout
ship and return to San Francisco.

The _Susquehanna_ was slowly turning around in obedience to her wheel,
as if reluctant to abandon forever a search in which humanity at large
was interested, when the look-out man, stationed in the forecastle,
suddenly sang out:

"A buoy to the nor'east, not far from shore!"

All telescopes were instantly turned in the direction indicated. The
buoy, or whatever object it was, could be readily distinguished. It
certainly did look like one of those buoys used to mark out the channel
that ships follow when entering a harbor. But as the vessel slowly
approached it, a small flag, flapping in the dying wind--a strange
feature in a buoy--was seen to surmount its cone, which a nearer
approach showed to be emerging four or five feet from the water. And for
a buoy too it was exceedingly bright and shiny, reflecting the red rays
of the setting sun as strongly as if its surface was crystal or polished
metal!

"Call Mr. Marston on deck at once!" cried the Captain, his voice
betraying unwonted excitement as he put the glass again to his eye.

Marston, thoroughly worn out by his incessant anxiety during the day,
had been just carried below by his friends, and they were now trying to
make him take a little refreshment and repose. But the Captain's order
brought them all on deck like a flash.

They found the whole crew gazing in one direction, and, though speaking
in little more than whispers, evidently in a state of extraordinary
excitement.

What could all this mean? Was there any ground for hope? The thought
sent a pang of delight through Marston's wildly beating heart that
almost choked him.

The Captain beckoned to the Club men to take a place on the bridge
beside himself. They instantly obeyed, all quietly yielding them a
passage.

The vessel was now only about a quarter of a mile distant from the
object and therefore near enough to allow it to be distinguished without
the aid of a glass.

What! The flag bore the well known Stars and Stripes!

An electric shudder of glad surprise shot through the assembled crowd.
They still spoke, however, in whispers, hardly daring to utter their
thoughts aloud.

The silence was suddenly startled by a howl of mingled ecstasy and rage
from Marston.

He would have fallen off the bridge, had not the others held him firmly.
Then he burst into a laugh loud and long, and quite as formidable as his
howl.

Then he tore away from his friends, and began beating himself over the
head.

"Oh!" he cried in accents between a yell and a groan, "what chuckleheads
we are! What numskulls! What jackasses! What double-treble-barrelled
gibbering idiots!" Then he fell to beating himself over the head again.

"What's the matter, Marston, for heaven's sake!" cried his friends,
vainly trying to hold him.

"Speak for yourself!" cried others, Belfast among the number.

"No exception, Belfast! You're as bad as the rest of us! We're all a set
of unmitigated, demoralized, dog-goned old lunatics! Ha! Ha! Ha!"

"Speak plainly, Marston! Tell us what you mean!"

"I mean," roared the terrible Secretary, "that we are no better than a
lot of cabbage heads, dead beats, and frauds, calling ourselves
scientists! O Barbican, how you must blush for us! If we were
schoolboys, we should all be skinned alive for our ignorance! Do you
forget, you herd of ignoramuses, that the Projectile weighs only ten
tons?"

"We don't forget it! We know it well! What of it?"

"This of it: it can't sink in water without displacing its own volume
in water; its own volume in water weighs thirty tons! Consequently, it
can't sink; more consequently, it hasn't sunk; and, most consequently,
there it is before us, bobbing up and down all the time under our very
noses! O Barbican, how can we ever venture to look at you straight in
the face again!"

Marston's extravagant manner of showing it did not prevent him from
being perfectly right. With all their knowledge of physics, not a single
one of those scientific gentlemen had remembered the great fundamental
law that governs sinking or floating bodies. Thanks to its slight
specific gravity, the Projectile, after reaching unknown depths of ocean
through the terrific momentum of its fall, had been at last arrested in
its course and even obliged to return to the surface.

By this time, all the passengers of the _Susquehanna_ could easily
recognize the object of such weary longings and desperate searches,
floating quietly a short distance before them in the last rays of the
declining day!

The boats were out in an instant. Marston and his friends took the
Captain's gig. The rowers pulled with a will towards the rapidly nearing
Projectile. What did it contain? The living or the dead? The living
certainly! as Marston whispered to those around him; otherwise how could
they have ever run up that flag?

The boats approached in perfect silence, all hearts throbbing with the
intensity of newly awakened hope, all eyes eagerly watching for some
sign to confirm it. No part of the windows appeared over the water, but
the trap hole had been thrown open, and through it came the pole that
bore the American flag. Marston made for the trap hole and, as it was
only a few feet above the surface, he had no difficulty in looking in.

At that moment, a joyful shout of triumph rose from the interior, and
the whole boat's crew heard a dry drawling voice with a nasal twang
exclaiming:

"Queen! How is that for high?"

It was instantly answered by another voice, shriller, louder, quicker,
more joyous and triumphant in tone, but slightly tinged with a foreign
accent:

"King! My brave Mac! How is that for high?"

The deep, clear, calm voice that spoke next thrilled the listeners
outside with an emotion that we shall not attempt to portray. Except
that their ears could detect in it the faintest possible emotion of
triumph, it was in all respects as cool, resolute, and self-possessed as
ever:

"Ace! Dear friends, how is that for high?"

They were quietly enjoying a little game of High-Low-Jack!

[Illustration: HOW IS THAT FOR HIGH?]

How they must have been startled by the wild cheers that suddenly rang
around their ocean-prison! How madly were these cheers re-echoed from
the decks of the _Susquehanna_! Who can describe the welcome that
greeted these long lost, long beloved, long despaired of Sons of Earth,
now so suddenly and unexpectedly rescued from destruction, and
restored once more to the wonderstricken eyes of admiring humanity? Who
can describe the scenes of joy and exuberant happiness, and deep felt
gratitude, and roaring rollicking merriment, that were witnessed on
board the steamer that night and during the next three days!

As for Marston, it need hardly be said that he was simply ecstatic, but
it may interest both the psychologist and the philologist to learn that
the expression _How is that for high?_ struck him at once as with a kind
of frenzy. It became immediately such a favorite tongue morsel of his
that ever since he has been employing it on all occasions, appropriate
or otherwise. Thanks to his exertions in its behalf all over the
country, the phrase is now the most popular of the day, well known and
relished in every part of the Union. If we can judge from its present
hold on the popular ear it will continue to live and flourish for many a
long day to come; it may even be accepted as the popular expression of
triumph in those dim, distant, future years when the memory not only of
the wonderful occasion of its formation but also of the illustrious men
themselves who originated it, has been consigned forever to the dark
tomb of oblivion!




CHAPTER XXIV.

FAREWELL TO THE BALTIMORE GUN CLUB.


The intense interest of our extraordinary but most veracious history
having reached its culmination at the end of the last chapter, our
absorbing chronicle might with every propriety have been then and there
concluded; but we can't part from our gracious and most indulgent reader
before giving him a few more details which may be instructive perhaps,
if not amusing.

No doubt he kindly remembers the world-wide sympathy with which our
three famous travellers had started on their memorable trip to the Moon.
If so, he may be able to form some idea of the enthusiasm universally
excited by the news of their safe return. Would not the millions of
spectators that had thronged Florida to witness their departure, now
rush to the other extremity of the Union to welcome them back? Could
those innumerable Europeans, Africans and Asiatics, who had visited the
United States simply to have a look at M'Nicholl, Ardan and Barbican,
ever think of quitting the country without having seen those wonderful
men again? Certainly not! Nay, more--the reception and the welcome that
those heroes would everywhere be greeted with, should be on a scale
fully commensurate with the grandeur of their own gigantic enterprise.
The Sons of Earth who had fearlessly quitted this terrestrial globe and
who had succeeded in returning after accomplishing a journey
inconceivably wonderful, well deserved to be received with every
extremity of pride, pomp and glorious circumstance that the world is
capable of displaying.

To catch a glimpse of these demi-gods, to hear the sound of their
voices, perhaps even to touch their hands--these were the only emotions
with which the great heart of the country at large was now throbbing.

To gratify this natural yearning of humanity, to afford not only to
every foreigner but to every native in the land an opportunity of
beholding the three heroes who had reflected such indelible glory on the
American name, and to do it all in a manner eminently worthy of the
great American Nation, instantly became the desire of the American
People.

To desire a thing, and to have it, are synonymous terms with the great
people of the American Republic.

A little thinking simplified the matter considerably: as all the people
could not go to the heroes, the heroes should go to all the people.

So decided, so done.

It was nearly two months before Barbican and his friends could get back
to Baltimore. The winter travelling over the Rocky Mountains had been
very difficult on account of the heavy snows, and, even when they found
themselves in the level country, though they tried to travel as
privately as possible, and for the present positively declined all
public receptions, they were compelled to spend some time in the houses
of the warm friends near whom they passed in the course of their long
journey.

The rough notes of their Moon adventures--the only ones that they could
furnish just then--circulating like wild fire and devoured with
universal avidity, only imparted a keener whet to the public desire to
feast their eyes on such men. These notes were telegraphed free to every
newspaper in the country, but the longest and best account of the
"_Journey to the Moon_" appeared in the columns of the _New York
Herald_, owing to the fact that Watkins the reporter had had the
adventurers all to himself during the whole of the three days' trip of
the _Susquehanna_ back to San Francisco. In a week after their return,
every man, woman, and child in the United States knew by heart some of
the main facts and incidents in the famous journey; but, of course, it
is needless to say that they knew nothing at all about the finer points
and the highly interesting minor details of the astounding story. These
are now all laid before the highly favored reader for the first time. I
presume it is unnecessary to add that they are worthy of his most
implicit confidence, having been industriously and conscientiously
compiled from the daily journals of the three travellers, revised,
corrected, and digested very carefully by Barbican himself.

It was, of course, too early at this period for the critics to pass a
decided opinion on the nature of the information furnished by our
travellers. Besides, the Moon is an exceedingly difficult subject. Very
few newspaper men in the country are capable of offering a single
opinion regarding her that is worth reading. This is probably also the
reason why half-scientists talk so much dogmatic nonsense about her.

Enough, however, had appeared in the notes to warrant the general
opinion that Barbican's explorations had set at rest forever several pet
theories lately started regarding the nature of our satellite. He and
his friends had seen her with their own eyes, and under such favorable
circumstances as to be altogether exceptional. Regarding her formation,
her origin, her inhabitability, they could easily tell what system
_should_ be rejected and what _might_ be admitted. Her past, her
present, and her future, had been alike laid bare before their eyes. How
can you object to the positive assertion of a conscientious man who has
passed within a few hundred miles of _Tycho_, the culminating point in
the strangest of all the strange systems of lunar oreography? What reply
can you make to a man who has sounded the dark abysses of the _Plato_
crater? How can you dare to contradict those men whom the vicissitudes
of their daring journey had swept over the dark, Invisible Face of the
Moon, never before revealed to human eye? It was now confessedly the
privilege and the right of these men to set limits to that selenographic
science which had till now been making itself so very busy in
reconstructing the lunar world. They could now say, authoritatively,
like Cuvier lecturing over a fossil skeleton: "Once the Moon was this, a
habitable world, and inhabitable long before our Earth! And now the Moon
is that, an uninhabitable world, and uninhabitable ages and ages ago!"

We must not even dream of undertaking a description of the grand _fête_
by which the return of the illustrious members of the Gun Club was to be
adequately celebrated, and the natural curiosity of their countrymen to
see them was to be reasonably gratified. It was one worthy in every way
of its recipients, worthy of the Gun Club, worthy of the Great Republic,
and, best of all, every man, woman, and child in the United States could
take part in it. It required at least three months to prepare it: but
this was not to be regretted as its leading idea could not be properly
carried out during the severe colds of winter.

All the great railroads of the Union had been closely united by
temporary rails, a uniform gauge had been everywhere adopted, and every
other necessary arrangement had been made to enable a splendid palace
car, expressly manufactured for the occasion by Pullman himself, to
visit every chief point in the United States without ever breaking
connection. Through the principal street in each city, or streets if one
was not large enough, rails had been laid so as to admit the passage of
the triumphal car. In many cities, as a precaution against unfavorable
weather, these streets had been arched over with glass, thus becoming
grand arcades, many of which have been allowed to remain so to the
present day. The houses lining these streets, hung with tapestry,
decorated with flowers, waving with banners, were all to be illuminated
at night time in a style at once both the most brilliant and the most
tasteful. On the sidewalks, tables had been laid, often miles and miles
long, at the public expense; these were to be covered with every kind of
eatables, exquisitely cooked, in the greatest profusion, and free to
everyone for twelve hours before the arrival of the illustrious guests
and also for twelve hours after their departure. The idea mainly aimed
at was that, at the grand national banquet about to take place, every
inhabitant of the United States, without exception, could consider
Barbican and his companions as his own particular guests for the time
being, thus giving them a welcome the heartiest and most unanimous that
the world has ever yet witnessed.

Evergreens were to deck the lamp-posts; triumphal arches to span the
streets; fountains, squirting _eau de cologne_, to perfume and cool the
air; bands, stationed at proper intervals, to play the most inspiring
music; and boys and girls from public and private schools, dressed in
picturesque attire, to sing songs of joy and glory. The people, seated
at the banquetting tables, were to rise and cheer and toast the heroes
as they passed; the military companies, in splendid uniforms, were to
salute them with presented arms; while the bells pealed from the church
towers, the great guns roared from the armories, _feux de joie_
resounded from the ships in the harbor, until the day's wildest whirl of
excitement was continued far into the night by a general illumination
and a surpassing display of fireworks. Right in the very heart of the
city, the slowly moving triumphal car was always to halt long enough to
allow the Club men to join the cheering citizens at their meal, which
was to be breakfast, dinner or supper according to that part of the day
at which the halt was made.

The number of champagne bottles drunk on these occasions, or of the
speeches made, or of the jokes told, or of the toasts offered, or of the
hands shaken, of course, I cannot now weary my kind reader by detailing,
though I have the whole account lying before me in black and white,
written out day by day in Barbican's own bold hand. Yet I should like to
give a few extracts from this wonderful journal. It is a perfect model
of accuracy and system. Whether detailing his own doings or those of the
innumerable people he met, Caesar himself never wrote anything more
lucid or more pointed. But nothing sets the extraordinary nature of this
great man in a better light than the firm, commanding, masterly
character of the handwriting in which these records are made. The
elegant penmanship all through might easily pass for copper plate
engraving--except on one page, dated "_Boston, after dinner_," where,
candor compels me to acknowledge, the "Solid Men" appear to have
succeeded in rendering his iron nerves the least bit wabbly.

The palace car had been so constructed that, by turning a few cranks and
pulling out a few bolts, it was transformed at once into a highly
decorated and extremely comfortable open barouche. Marston took the seat
usually occupied by the driver: Ardan and M'Nicholl sat immediately
under him, face to face with Barbican, who, in order that everyone might
be able to distinguish him, was to keep all the back seat for himself,
the post of honor.

On Monday morning, the fifth of May, a month generally the pleasantest
in the United States, the grand national banquet commenced in Baltimore,
and lasted twenty-four hours. The Gun Club insisted on paying all the
expenses of the day, and the city compromised by being allowed to
celebrate in whatever way it pleased the reception of the Club men on
their return.

They started on their trip that same day in the midst of one of the
grandest ovations possible to conceive. They stopped for a little while
at Wilmington, but they took dinner in Philadelphia, where the splendor
of Broad Street (at present the finest boulevard in the world, being 113
feet wide and five miles long) can be more easily alluded to than even
partially described.

The house fronts glittered with flowers, flags, pictures, tapestries,
and other decorations; the chimneys and roofs swarmed with men and boys
cheerfully risking their necks every moment to get one glance at the
"Moon men"; every window was a brilliant bouquet of beautiful ladies
waving their scented handkerchiefs and showering their sweetest smiles;
the elevated tables on the sidewalks, groaning with an abundance of
excellent and varied food, were lined with men, women, and children,
who, however occupied in eating and drinking, never forgot to salute the
heroes, cheering them lustily as they slowly moved along; the spacious
street itself, just paved from end to end with smooth Belgian blocks,
was a living moving panorama of soldiers, temperance men, free masons,
and other societies, radiant in gorgeous uniforms, brilliant in flashing
banners, and simply perfect in the rhythmic cadence of their tread,
wings of delicious music seeming to bear them onward in their proud and
stately march.

A vast awning, spanning the street from ridge to ridge, had been so
prepared and arranged that, in case of rain or too strong a glare from
the summer sun, it could be opened out wholly or partially in the space
of a very few minutes. There was not, however, the slightest occasion
for using it, the weather being exceedingly fine, almost paradisiacal,
as Marston loved to phrase it.

[Illustration: THEIR ARRIVAL WAS WELCOMED WITH EQUAL _FURORE_.]

The "Moon men" supped and spent the night in New York, where they were
received with even greater enthusiasm than at Philadelphia. But no
detailed description can be given of their majestic progress from city
to city through all portions of the mighty Republic. It is enough to say
that they visited every important town from Portland to San Francisco,
from Salt Lake City to New Orleans, from Mobile to Charleston, and from
Saint Louis to Baltimore; that, in every section of the great country,
preparations for their reception were equally as enthusiastic, their
arrival was welcomed with equal _furore_, and their departure
accompanied with an equal amount of affectionate and touching sympathy.

The _New York Herald_ reporter, Mr. Watkins, followed them closely
everywhere in a palace car of his own, and kept the public fully
enlightened regarding every incident worth regarding along the route,
almost as soon as it happened. He was enabled to do this by means of a
portable telegraphic machine of new and most ingenious construction.
Though its motive power was electricity, it could dispense with the
ordinary instruments and even with wires altogether, yet it managed to
transmit messages to most parts of the world with an accuracy that,
considering how seldom it failed, is almost miraculous. The principle
actuating it, though guessed at by many shrewd scientists, is still a
profound secret and will probably remain so for some time longer, the
_Herald_ having purchased the right to its sole and exclusive use for
fifteen years, at an enormous cost.

Who shall say that the apotheosis of our three heroes was not worthy of
them, or that, had they lived in the old prehistoric times, they would
not have taken the loftiest places among the demi-gods?

As the tremendous whirl of excitement began slowly to die away, the
more thoughtful heads of the Great Republic began asking each other a
few questions:

Can this wonderful journey, unprecedented in the annals of wonderful
journeys, ever lead to any practical result?

Shall we ever live to see direct communication established with the
Moon?

Will any Air Line of space navigation ever undertake to start a system
of locomotion between the different members of the solar system?

Have we any reasonable grounds for ever expecting to see trains running
between planet and planet, as from Mars to Jupiter and, possibly
afterwards, from star to star, as from Polaris to Sirius?

Even to-day these are exceedingly puzzling questions, and, with all our
much vaunted scientific progress, such as "no fellow can make out." But
if we only reflect a moment on the audacious go-a-headiveness of the
Yankee branch of the Anglo Saxon race, we shall easily conclude that the
American people will never rest quietly until they have pushed to its
last result and to every logical consequence the astounding step so
daringly conceived and so wonderfully carried out by their great
countryman Barbican.

In fact, within a very few months after the return of the Club men from
the Continental Banquet, as it was called in the papers, the country was
flooded by a number of little books, like Insurance pamphlets, thrust
into every letter box and pushed under every door, announcing the
formation of a new company called _The Grand Interstellar Communication
Society_. The Capital was to be 100 million dollars, at a thousand
dollars a share: J.P. BARBICAN, ESQ., P.G.C. was to be President;
Colonel JOSHUA D. M'NICHOLL, Vice-President; Hon. J.T. MARSTON,
Secretary; Chevalier MICHAEL ARDAN, General Manager; JOHN MURPHY, ESQ.,
Chief Engineer; H. PHILLIPS COLEMAN, ESQ. (Philadelphia lawyer), Legal
Adviser; and the Astrological Adviser was to be Professor HENRY of
Washington. (Belfast's blunder had injured him so much in public
estimation, his former partisans having become his most merciless
revilers, that it was considered advisable to omit his name altogether
even in the list of the Directors.)

From the very beginning, the moneyed public looked on the G.I.C.S, with
decided favor, and its shares were bought up pretty freely. Conducted on
strictly honorable principles, keeping carefully aloof from all such
damaging connection as the _Credit Mobilier_, and having its books
always thrown open for public inspection, its reputation even to-day is
excellent and continually improving in the popular estimation. Holding
out no utopian inducements to catch the unwary, and making no wheedling
promises to blind the guileless, it states its great objects with all
their great advantages, without at the same time suppressing its
enormous and perhaps insuperable difficulties. People know exactly what
to think of it, and, whether it ever meets with perfect success or
proves a complete failure, no one in the country will ever think of
casting a slur on the bright name of its peerless President, J.P.
Barbican.

For a few years this great man devoted every faculty of his mind to the
furthering of the Company's objects. But in the midst of his labors, the
rapid approach of the CENTENNIAL surprised him. After a long and careful
consultation on the subject, the Directors and Stockholders of the
G.I.C.S. advised him to suspend all further labors in their behalf for a
few years, in order that he might be freer to devote the full energies
of his giant intellect towards celebrating the first hundredth
anniversary of his country's Independence--as all true Americans would
wish to see it celebrated--in a manner every way worthy of the GREAT
REPUBLIC OF THE WEST!

Obeying orders instantly and with the single-idea'd, unselfish
enthusiasm of his nature, he threw himself at once heart and soul into
the great enterprise. Though possessing no official prominence--this he
absolutely insists upon--he is well known to be the great fountain head
whence emanate all the life, order, dispatch, simplicity, economy, and
wonderful harmony which, so far, have so eminently characterized the
magnificent project. With all operations for raising the necessary
funds--further than by giving some sound practical advice--he positively
refused to connect himself (this may be the reason why subscriptions to
the Centennial stock are so slow in coming in), but in the proper
apportionment of expenses and the strict surveillance of the mechanical,
engineering, and architectural departments, his services have proved
invaluable. His experience in the vast operations at Stony Hill has
given him great skill in the difficult art of managing men. His voice is
seldom heard at the meetings, but when it is, people seem to take a
pleasure in readily submitting to its dictates.

In wet weather or dry, in hot weather or cold, he may still be seen
every day at Fairmount Park, Philadelphia, leisurely strolling from
building to building, picking his steps quietly through the bustling
crowds of busy workmen, never speaking a word, not even to Marston his
faithful shadow, often pencilling something in his pocket book, stopping
occasionally to look apparently nowhere, but never, you may be sure,
allowing a single detail in the restless panorama around him to escape
the piercing shaft of his eagle glance.

He is evidently determined on rendering the great CENTENNIAL of his
country a still greater and more wonderful success than even his own
world-famous and never to be forgotten JOURNEY through the boundless
fields of ether, and ALL AROUND THE MOON!

END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of All Around the Moon, by Jules Verne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALL AROUND THE MOON ***

***** This file should be named 16457-8.txt or 16457-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/4/5/16457/

Produced by Afra Ullah, Taavi Kalju and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.


Harry Potter & Philosopher's Stone


RD
SCREENPLAY REVISIONS 1
v2	
HARRY POTTER AND THE SORCERER S STONE
HARRY POTTER AND THE SORCERER S STONE

v2 was generated by Vlad Nikolaev on Aug 25 @ 9:38am
EXT. PRIVET DRIVE - NIGHT
Dark at this hour, except for the STREET LAMPS that dot the street, spilling deep pools of light upon the ground.
On the far corner, a MAN MATERIALIZES out of the darkness. He is tall and thin, with a silver beard long enough to tuck into his belt. He wears a PURPLE CLOAK and is roughly one hundred and fifty years old. He is ALBUS DUMBLEDORE.
Dumbledore removes a small silver object from his cloak—the PUT-OUTER. He extends his hand and—CLICK—the nearest street lamp GOES OUT with a soft pop. He continues to click the Put-Outer until all the lamps go DARK.
He turns, spies a CAT, sitting on the wall of Number Four. He smiles knowingly.
DUMBLEDORE
I should have known you'd be here, Professor McGonagall.
The cat leaps forward, TRANSFIGURES itself into a rather severe-looking woman in an EMERALD CLOAK.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Are the rumors true, Albus?
DUMBLEDORE
smile fading
I'm afraid so. The good. And the bad.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
And the boy?
DUMBLEDORE
Hagrid's bringing him.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
You think it...wise...to trust Hagrid with something as important as this?
DUMBLEDORE
I would trust Hagrid with my life, Professor.
A LOW RUMBLE disturbs the skies. Dumbledore and McGonagall look up and—suddenly—a HUGE MOTORCYCLE plummets through the clouds, hits the ground with a THUNDEROUS ROAR. As the SMOKE clears, a FIGURE climbs off. He is HAGRID and is, quite obviously, a GIANT. In his vast, muscular arms, he holds a BUNDLE of BLANKETS.
HAGRID
Ev'ning, professor Dumbledore, sir. Professor McGonagall.
DUMBLEDORE
No problems, I take it, Hagrid?
HAGRID
No sir. Little tyke fell ter sleep as we was flyin' o'er Bristol.
Hagrid steps forward and Dumbledore takes the bundle, turns toward the doorstep.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Albus, do you really think it best to leave him here, with these people? I've been watching them all day. They're the worst sort of Muggles imaginable. They're...
DUMBLEDORE
The only family he has.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
But this boy will be famous. There won't be a child in our world who doesn't know his name...
DUMBLEDORE
Exactly. It would be enough to turn any boy's head. Famous before he can walk and talk. Famous for something he won't even remember. No. He'll be much better off growing up away from all that. Until he's ready.
Dumbledore lays the bundle on the mat. Hagrid SNIFFLES.
DUMBLEDORE
There, there, Hagrid. It's not eally goodbye, after all.
Hagrid hods. Dumbledore tucks a PARCHMENT ENVELOPE into the blankets and steps back, his face suddenly dark. Serious.
DUMBLEDORE
Good luck, Harry Potter.
The CAMERA DOLLIES forward, toward the swaddled baby. A CUT, still fresh, gleams on the baby's forehead. It is in the shape of a BOLT of LIGHTNING. SMASH CUT TO TEN YEARS LATER.
INT. CUPBOARD - NUMBER FOUR PRIVET DRIVE - MORNING
A pair of blinking GREEN EYES jerk into the light.
WOMAN'S VOICE (O.S.)
Up! Now!
THUMP! THUMP! THUMP!
WOMAN'S VOICE
I said now!
FOOTSTEPS RECEDE and HARRY POTTER, now ten years old, swings his skinny legs to the floor. He's small, which is lucky since his room is not really a room at all, but merely a cupboard under the stairs.
Abruptly, the cupboard begins to SHAKE, DUST spilling from the joists above Harry's head. Calmly, Harry takes a pair of EYEGLASSES—taped at the bridge with Sellotape—from a nail.
EXT. HALLWAY - DAY
Harry comes blinking out the cupboard door, watches his enormous cousin, DUDLEY, thunder down the last step. Just then, Harry's Aunt Petunia appears in the kitchen ahead.
AUNT PETUNIA
There's the birthday boy! Don't you look smart for your trip to the zoo.
scowling at Harry
You mind the bacon. And don't dare let it burn. I want everything perfect on my Dimplin's special day.
HARRY
Yes, Aunt Petunia.
INT. KITCHEN - DAY
Harry enters, finds his UNCLE VERNON reading the Daily Mail behind a monstrous PILE OF PRESENTS.
UNCLE VERNON
Bring my coffee, boy.
HARRY
Yes, Uncle Vernon.
Dudley enters, stares at the presents.
DUDLEY
How many are there?
UNCLE VERNON
Thirty-six. Counted them myself.
DUDLEY
Thirty-six. But last year...last year I had thirty-seven...
UNCLE VERNON
Well now, son, some of these are quite a bit bigger than last year--
DUDLEY
I DON'T CARE HOW BIG THEY ARE!
AUNT PETUNIA
Now, now, here's what we'll do. Today, when we're out, we'll buy you two more presents. How's that, popkin?
DUDLEY
So then I'll have...I'll have...
HARRY
Thirty-eight, popkin.
Aunt Petunia cuffs Harry on the head on her way to the RINGING TELEPHONE.
AUNT PETUNIA
You just mind that bacon!
HARRY
Yes, Aunt Petunia.
As Dudley tears open a BOX of LEAD SOLDIERS, Uncle Vernon ruffles his hair.
UNCLE VERNON
Want your money's worth, don't you, tiger. Well, look there. Aunt Marge's sent you the Fourth Battalion?
Dudley twists the head off one.
DUDLEY
This one's lost its head.
UNCLE VERNON
Well now, son. Remember, we talked about this. They're not meant to move...
As Dudleyrtosses the damaged soldier aside, Harry studies it closely, then...Aunt Petunia HANGS UP the phone, turns.
AUNT PETUNIA
Bad news. Mrs. Figgs' broken her leg. She can't take him.
UNCLE VERNON
We could phone Yvonne.
AUNT PETUNIA
Don't be silly. She hates the boy.
HARRY
You could just leave me here.
UNCLE VERNON
And come back to find the house in ruins?
DUDLEY
I...Don't...Want...Him...To...Come! He... always... spoils... everything!
AUNT PETUNIA
Now, precious, don't cry. He won't spoil anything. What if Mummy buys you three more presents.
DUDLEY
Three?
AUNT PETUNIA
As many as you want, sweetums.
As Aunt Petunia cuddles him, Dudley shoots Harry a nasty grin through the gap in his mother's arms.
EXT. NUMBER FOUR PRIVET DRIVE - A BIT LATER
As Harry gets in the car, Uncle Vernon leans close.
UNCLE VERNON
I'm warning you now, boy. Any funny business, any at all, and you'll have no meals for a week...
EXT. ZOO - DAY
Happy children walk hand in hand with their parents, as...
INT. REPTILE HOUSE - LATER - DAY
Dudley presses his pudgy nose to a gleaming plate of glass.
DUDLEY
Make it move.
Uncle Vernon looks over a zoo map at the HUGE BURMESE PYTHON curled beyond the glass. RAPS his knuckles. Nothing.
HARRY
He's asleep.
DUDLEY
He's boring.
Dudley waddles away and the others follow, all but Harry, who steps forward and rubs Dudley's noseprint from the glass.
HARRY
Sorry about him. He doesn't understand what it's like, lying there day after day, watching people press their ugly faces in on you...
The snake nods. Harry stops, looks off, then back. WHISPERS:
HARRY
Can you hear me?
The snake cocks its head and...winks.
HARRY
It's just, I've never talked to a snake before. Do you, I mean...do you talk to people often?
The snake regards Harry...then slowly shakes its head no. Harry nods, looking a bit unnerved.
HARRY
So...you're from Burma, aren't you? Was it nice there? Do you miss your family?
listening
I see. That's me as well. I never knew my parents either...
DUDLEY
MUMMY! DAD! COME HERE! You won't believe what this snake is doing!
Dudley JABS Harry hard in the ribs, sending him tumbling to the concrete, floor. Angry, Harry looks up as Dudley leans against the^glass and it...VANISHES. Dudley flops forward, the snake slithers out, and people run screaming.
Stunned, Harry watches the python slip into the sunshine, then glances back to the snake tank. The glass has reappeared and Dudley sits within, face pale, eyes frozen in terror.
INT. NUMBER FOUR PRIVET DRIVE - LATER - DAY
Uncle Vernon, face purple with rage, drags Harry by the ear.
HARRY
I swear, I don't know how it happened! One minute the glass was there and then it was gone. It was like magic.
Uncle Vernon hurls Harry into the cupboard, stares hard.
UNCLE VERNON
There's...no...such...thing...as...magic!
The door SLAMS. Harry sits quietly. Then, from his pocket, he removes the damaged soldier Dudley had discarded earlier.
Reaching up, he places it on a dark shelf, next to half a dozen others.
EXT. NUMBER FOUR PRIVET DRIVE - MORNING
A single OWL swoops down onto the Dursley's roof.
INT. KITCHEN - MORNING
Dudley parades about the kitchen in knickerbockers, tailcoat and straw boater, tapping the floor with a KNOBBLY STICK, while a teary Aunt Petunia snaps a photo with a FLASH CAMERA.
AUNT PETUNIA
Oh, Vernon, look at him. To think in only a week he'll be off to Smeltings.
UNCLE VERNON
Proudest moment of my life.
HARRY
with dread
Will I have to wear that too?
AUNT PETUNIA
You! Go to Smeltings? Don't be stupid. You'll goto state school, where you belong. That there'll be yours, once I'm done dying it.
Harry glances at a tub of grey mud boiling on the stove.
HARRY
But that's Dudley's old uniform. It'll fit me like bits of old elephant skin.
AUNT PETUNIA
Fit you fine enough. Now fetch the post.
INT. FRONT HALL - DAY
Three letters lie on the mat. A bill. A postcard. An envelope of YELLOW PARCHMENT. Harry takes all, then stops, staring at the envelope, which is addressed in EMERALD INK.
Mr. H. Potter
The Cupboard Under The Stairs
4 Privet Drive
Little Whinging
Surrey
Harry turns the envelope over, finds a PURPLE WAX SEAL. It is a COAT OF ARMS, surrounding a large letter H.
INT. KITCHEN - DAY
arry drops the post on the table and sits, staring in quiet wonderment at his envelope. Uncle Vernon takes the postcard.
UNCLE VERNON
Marge's ill. Ate a funny whelk...
BAM! Dudley brings the Smelting stick down-hard on the table.
DUDLEY
Dad! Look! Harry's got a letter!
Quickly, Uncle Vernon SNATCHES it away.
HARRY
That's mine!
UNCLE VERNON
Yours. Who'd be writing to you—
Uncle Vernon's face goes pale.
INT. HALLWAY - DAY
The boys come flying into the hall, throw themselves against the door as.it slams shut.
HARRY
I want my letter!
DUDLEY
I want my stick!
Harry and Dudley make a furious play for the keyhole, but Dudley's size proves too much and Harry, glasses dangling from one ear, settles for the crack between door and floor.
HARRY'S POV
of Uncle Vernon's thick black shoes pacing back and forth.
AUNT PETUNIA
Vernon. Look at the address. How could they possibly know where he sleeps? You don't think they're watching the house?
UNCLE VERNON
Watching. Spying. Following us. We both know the dangerous nonsense your sister and her husband were mixed up in.
AUNT PETUNIA
But what should we do, Vernon? Should we write back. Tell them we don't want—
UNCLE VERNON
No. We'll ignore it. If they don't get an answer...Yes, that's best...I'll burn it.
HARRY
NO! I WANT MY LETTER!
INT. KITCHEN - DAY
Uncle Vernon walks to the stove, flips on a gas jet. As the letter BURNS, Harry POUNDS the door, and a MONTAGE BEGINS.
EXT. ROOF - NUMBER FOUR PRIVET DRIVE - MORNING
An OWL beats its way across the sky, flutters down upon the TV ANTENNA, where TWO OTHER OWLS already sit.
INT. LIVING ROOM - SAME TIME
A frowning? Uncle Vernon stands before the TELLY, struggling to unscramble a RUGBY MATCH. The CLICK of the MAIL SLOT is heard and he turns.
INT. FRONT HALL -DAY
THREE MORE LETTERS lie on the mat. Uncle Vernon enters, snatches them up, RIPS them to pieces.
INT. CUPBOARD - DAY
Harry sits sadly upon his bed, when...BANG! BANG! BANG!
INT. FRONT HALLWAY - MOMENTS LATER
Harry eases open the cupboard door. Down the hallway, Uncle Vernon stands swinging a hammer, mouth bulging with nails as he POUNDS SHUT the mail slot.
EXT. NUMBER FOUR PRIVET DRIVE - MORNING
Uncle Vernon exits the house with his briefcase, stops. FOUR OWLS sit atop his Vauxhall. He watches curiously as they take flight, then looks down. FOUR LETTERS lie at his feet.
INT. LIVING ROOM - NIGHT
The FIREPLACE BLAZES. Uncle Vernon pitches a handful of LETTERS into the flames, turns. Harry stands watching.
EXT. ROOF - NUMBER FOUR PRIVET DRIVE - SAME TIME
As the CHIMNEY SMOKES, FIVE OWLS sit in black silhouette against a full moon.
EXT. KITCHEN WINDOW - NUMBER FOUR PRIVET DRIVE - MORNING
Aunt Petunia cracks an EGG. Inside is a LETTER. She cracks another. Another LETTER. We PAN off the window to Dudley's neglected BICYCLE. Perched atop the handlebars, seat and tires are SIX OWLS. MONTAGE ENDS.
INT. LIVING ROOM - SUNDAY MORNING - DAY
Dudley lies on the floor, destroying another birthday toy, as Aunt Petunia carefully sets a cup of coffee by Uncle Vernon, who sits in an armchair, smiling strangely.
UNCLE VERNON
Fine day, Sunday. Best day of the week in my opinion. Know why I say that, Dudley?
HARRY
entering
Because there's no post on Sundays.
Uncle Vernon looks up brightly, but Harry's eyes are on the window behind him. Outside, the sky is DARK WITH OWLS.
UNCLE VERNON
Right you are, Harry! No damn letters today! No sir. Not one blasted...
Just then, something WHIZZES DOWN the chimney and SMACKS Uncle Vernon flat on the back of the head. Seconds later another follows, and then another, until the living room is aflock with...LETTERS. Harry leaps onto a table, trying to snag one, when Uncle Vernon seizes him by the waist.
INT. HALLWAY - DAY
As Uncle Vernon stumbles out, Harry shakes free of his grasp and stares dumbly: LETTERS swirl up and down the hall.
DUDLEY
Who on earth wants to talk to you this badly!
A letter flutters on Harry's fingertips...before Uncle Vernon sweeps it away, eyes crazed, SHOUTING CRAZILY:
UNCLE VERNON
That does it! We're going away! Far away! Where they can't find us! Where they can't get to us!
Dudley glances at his mother.
DUDLEY
Daddy's gone mad, hasn't he?
EXT. HUT ON THE ROCK - NIGHT
A very sad-looking HUT sits perched upon a large ROCK far at sea. Wind whistles. The sea rages.
INT. HUT ON THE ROCK - NIGHT
Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia sleep on a lumpy bed in the hut's only bedroom. Dudley SNORES on a moth-eaten sofa. Harry lies on the bare floor beneath a ragged blanket. LIGHTNING FLASHES. As the room goes dark again, Harry studies the lighted dial of Dudley's watch. As it ticks toward midnight, Harry puts the last touches to a BIRTHDAY CAKE he's etched in the dust that layers the floor.
HARRY
Make a wish, Harry.
Closing his eyes, he...blows...and the "flames" of dust scatter. Eyes still closed, Harry holds the wish when...
BOOM!
The DOOR SHUDDERS. HINGES squeal. A pin squirrels out of its housing. Falls to the floor.
BOOM!
Uncle Vernon comes sledding into the room in his socks, a RIFLE in hand, paper hanging by a string from the barrel.
UNCLE VERNON
Who's there? I warn you--I'm armed!
SMASH! The door falls flat. An IMMENSE SILHOUETTE stands against the raging sea outside, identical to the beastly figure seen climbing the stairs in Godric's Hollow. He is HAGRID and is, rather obviously, a GIANT. Presently he is standing on the front door.
HAGRID
Er, right. Sorry 'bout that...
Hagrid steps clear, takes the door, and fits it back into its frame. Glances at Dudley. Frowns.
HAGRID
Mind, I haven't seen yeh since you was a baby, Harry, but yeh're a bit more along than I woulda expected. ’Specially round the middle.
DUDLEY
terrified
I'm not Harry.
HARRY
I am.
Hagrid turns, watches Harty's face come into the light.
HAGRID
Well now, course yeh are.
UNCLE VERNON
I demand that you leave at once, sir! You are breaking and entering!
HAGRID
Ah, dry up, Dursley, yeh great prune.
Hagrid takes the rifle, knots it like a piece of licorice.
HAGRID
Anyway, Harry. Got summat fer yeh. ’Fraid I mighta sat on it at some point, but ’magine it'll taste all right jus' the same...let's see now...got it here somewhere...
Hagrid rummages in his coat, removes: a kettle, frying pan, sausages, one PINK UMBRELLA and, finally, a squashed paper box containing a CHOCOLATE CAKE with "Happee Birthdae, Harry" scrawled in green icing.
HAGRID
Baked it meself, words an' all.
HARRY
Thank you.
HAGRID
Well, it's not ev' ry day yer young mein turns ’leven.
Hagrid turns to the fireplace, gives the embers a poke with the pink umbrella. As they ROAR to life, he takes the frying pan, lobs in the sausages. Dudley perks up as they sizzle.
HARRY
Excuse me, but.. .who are you?
Harry stares blankly. Hagrid frowns.
HAGRID
Blimey, Harry, did yeh never wonder where yer parents learnt it all?
HARRY
Learned what?
HAGRID
What? DURSLEY!!! Do yeh mean ter tell me the boy knows nothin?
Uncle Vernon stands mute. Hagrid simmers, then shakes his head and turns back to the fire.
HAGRID
’Harry, yer a wizard.
For a moment, the hut is utterly silent.
HARRY
I'm a what?
HAGRID
A Wizard. And a thumpin' good 'un, I'd wager, once yeh've been trained up a bit.
HARRY
No. You've made a mistake. I...I can't be a...wizard. I mean...I'm just...Harry. Just Harry.
HAGRID
Tha' right. Tell me, Harry. Ever make somethin' strange 'appen? When yeh was scared maybe. Or angry?
As Harry looks up in recognition, Hagrid slaps a soggy ENVELOPE into Harry's hand. Harry opens it, reads.
HARRY
'Dear Mr. Potter, We are pleased to inform you that you have been accepted at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry...'
As Harry looks up, Hagrid winks, and takes a bite of sausage.
UNCLE VERNON
He'll not be going, I tell you! We swore when we took him in we'd put a stop to that rubbish!
HARRY
You knew? You knew I'm a...a wizard?
Aunt Petunia—looking furious—emerges from the shadows.
AUNT PETUNIA
Of course we knew! How could you not be, my dratted sister being what she was? Oh, mother and father were so proud when the letter came. A witch in the family. Isn't it wonderful. I was the only one who saw her for what she was...a freak!
distastefully
Then she met that Potter and had you. I knew you'd be the same. Just as strange, just as abnormal. And then, if you please, she went and got herself blown up and we got landed with you—
HARRY
Blown up? You told me my parents died in a car crash.
HAGRID
CAR CRASH! A car crash kill Lily and James Potter? It's an outrage! A scandal!
UNCLE VERNON
HE'LL NOT BE GOING, I TELL YOU!
HAGRID
An' I s'ppose a great Muggle like yerself is goin' ter stop him.
HARRY
Muggle?
HAGRID
Non-magic folk.
turning to Uncle Vernon
This boy's name's been down ever since he was born. He's off to the finest school of witchcraft and wizardry in the world and he'll be under the greatest headmaster Hogwart's has ever known, Albus Dumbledore—
UNCLE VERNON
I will not pay for some crackpot old fool to teach him magic tricks!
Hagrid spins, eyes bulging.
HAGRID
NEVER..INSULT...ALBUS...DUMBLEDORE...IN...FRONT...OF..ME!
Hagrid spins, points the umbrella at Uncle Vernon, then spies Dudley, one hand deep in Harry's birthday cake. POP!—a FLASH of VIOLET LIGHT hits Dudley square in the rump. Instantly, a PIG’S TAIL curls through the back of his trousers. Uncle Vernon ROARS, hurries everyone out of the room.
HAGRID
Tha’s curious. Meant ter turn ’im into a complete pig, whole hog an all. Suppose he was so much like a pig already, there wasn't much left ter do.
Hagrid sees Harry staring in awe at the pink umbrella.
HAGRID
Er, be grateful if yeh didn't mention that to anyone at Hogwarts. Strictly speakin', I'm not allowed ter do magic.
checks pocket watch
Bit behind schedule, aren't we? Best be off.
Hagrid exits, leaving Harry to consider his sorry surroundings. He looks momentarily at a loss, then...Hagrid pokes his head back in.
HAGRID
T'Less, o' course, yeh'd rather stay.
EXT. STREET - LONDON - DAWN
Harry, reads ALOUD from his LIST as he trails Hagrid, who draws an eye or two—as a giant in Central London will.
HARRY
'First year students will require three sets of plain work robes, one plain pointed hat for day wear, one pair of dragon-hide gloves...'
Hagrid chuckles at a PARKING METER.
HAGRID
Things these Muggles dream up...
INT. TRAIN - LONDON - DAWN
Harry sits beside Hagrid, continues to read from his list.
HARRY
'...and the following Set Books: The Standard Book of Spells by Miranda Goshawk. One Thousand Magical Herbs and Fungi by Phyllida Spore...'
EXT. STREET/LEAKY CAULDRON - LONDON - DAWN
Hagrid leads Harry on, parting the crowd easily.
HARRY
'One wand, one standard Size 2 pewter cauldron and may bring, if they desire, either an owl, a cat, or a toad.'
looking up
Can we find all this in London?
Hagrid pauses by a NARROW GRAY DOOR that stands between a BOOK SHOP on one side and a RECORD SHOP on the other.
HAGRID
If yen know where to go.
INT. LEAKY CAULDRON - DAY
A dark, shabby pub. in a corner, some OLD WOMEN sit drinking, one smoking a pipe as long as her arm. Up front, a TINY MAN in a TOP HAT talks to the BARTENDER, who resembles a gummy walnut. Harry and Hagrid enter.
BARTENDER
Hagrid! The usual, I presume—
spying Harry
Good Lord. Is this? Can this be him? Bless my soul. It's Harry Potter.
The pub goes quiet. Then... everyone is up and around Harry, holding out their hands and gabbling, while Hagrid looks on, beaming. Slowly, a NERVOUS YOUNG MAN makes his way forward.
QUIRRELL
Harry P-P-Potter. C-Can't tell you how p-pleased I am to meet you.
HAGRID
Professor! Didn't see yeh there. Harry, this 'ere's Professor Quirrell. He'll be yer Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher at Hogwarts.
QUIRRELL
F-F-Fearfully f-fascinating subject. N-Not that you n-need it, eh, P-P-Potter?
Quirrell's eyes flutter nervously over Harry's scar.
HAGRID
Yes, well, must get on. Lots ter buy.
as he pulls Harry along
See? Tol' yeh you was famous.
EXT. BACK COURTYARD/LEAKY CAULDRON - MOMENTS LATER
Hagrid TAPS the bricks of one wall with the tip of his umbrella while Harry stands by, deep in thought.
HARRY
Why am I famous, Hagrid? All those people back there. How is it they know who I am?
HAGRID
Don' know that I'm the right one ter tell yeh that, Harry. Let's see now...Three up...Two across...Right. Stand back now.
Hagrid gives the wall one last 'TAP and the bricks QUIVER, wriggling and jiggling until an ARCHWAY appears, giving out on a COBBLED STREET so long and twisting it seems never to end. As Harry's jaw drops, Hagrid grins.
HAGRID
Welcome, Harry. To Diagon Alley.
EXT. DIAGON ALLEY - CONTINUOUS - MORNING
As Harry steps through, the archway SHRINKS INSTANTLY into a solid wall. All around him, Harry sees mothers and fathers with children in tow, clutching LISTS similar to his own.
PLUMP WOMAN
Seventeen Sickles an ounce for Dragon Liver, can you imagine? They're mad!
MOTHER
It says brass, Trevor. As such, you will get brass,
BOY
There it is! The Nimbus Two Thousand! Runs a good twenty times faster than the old Comets. Neil Marks himself rides it for the Chudley Cannons.
FATHER
Mind you don't drop your bottle of eel's eye, Belinda, I'll not buy you another.
Harry tries to take in everything at once, marveling at shops specializing in everything from cauldrons, owls and broomsticks to robes, 'unmentionables,' and spell books.
HARRY
Dragon Liver? Do they mean from a real dragon?
HAGRID
Well, they don't mean a ruddy penguin. Crikey, I'd like a dragon.
HARRY
You'd like a dragon?
HAGRID
Vastly misunderstood beasts, Harry. Vastly misunderstood...
HARRY
staring in a cauldron shop
But how am I to pay for all this, Hagrid? I haven't any money.
Hagrid gestures to a TOWERING, SNOW-WHITE BUILDING ahead.
HAGRID
There's yer money. Gringotts. Wizard's Bank. No place safer, Harry. Not one. 'Cept perhaps Hogwarts.
INT. GRINGOTTS - DAY
ONE HUNDRED GOBLINS sit on high stools at a long counter, scribbling in ledgers, weighing coins in brass scales. As Harry and Hagrid enter, a clever-looking goblin closes the door behind them, watches their every step.
HARRY
Uh, Hagrid, what exactly was that?
HAGRID
Yer basic Door Goblin. Clever as they come goblins, but not yer most friendly beasts. Best stay close.
stepping up to a teller
Mornin'. Mr. Harry Potter wishes to make a withdrawal.
GOBLIN
And Mr. Harry Potter has his key?
HAGRID
Let's see, got it 'ere somewhere...
The Goblin looks on disfavorably as Hagrid rifles his coat, producing in rapid succession: a jangly RING of KEYS, one BALL of STRING, a fistful of MINT HUMBUGS, two TEABAGS, and a MOTH...which simply flutters from one pocket to another.
HAGRID
Ah, 'ere's the li'l devil.
leaning close
There's another matter as well. I've got a letter from Professor Dumbledore. It's about the You-Know-What in Vault You-Know-Which.
GOBLIN
Very well. I'll have Griphook take you.
INT. STONE PASSAGEWAY - GRINGOTTS - DAY
CLOSE ON: GRIPHOOK
...a swarthy, slit-eyed goblin, driving a small cart with white-knuckle precision down a STONE PASSAGEWAY lit with FLAMING TORCHES. They plunge deeper, come...
EXT. VAULT - STONE PASSAGEWAY - DAY
...whistling to a halt before a SMALL DOOR. Griphook steps out, takes Harry's key and UNLOCKS the vault, revealing - great glittering pyramids of coin. Harry is speechless.
HAGRID
Din' think yer parents would leave yeh with nothin', did yeh?
INT. CART - PASSAGEWAYS - A FEW MINUTES LATER
The cart hurtles even DEEPER, abruptly stops.
GRIPHOOK
Vault Seven Hundred Thirteen.
HARRY
What's in here, Hagrid?
HAGRID
Can’t tell yeh that, Harry. Hogwarts business. Very secret.
Griphook steps up to a door with no keyhole, strokes it with one long finger, and it simply MELTS away.
HAGRID
Anyone but a Gringotts goblin tried that, they'd be sucked through the door.
HARRY
How often do you check to see if anyone's inside?
GRIPHOOK
About once every ten years.
Harry peers into the vault, sees...a GRUBBY LITTLE PACKAGE. Hagrid slips it into his LEFT COAT POCKET, returns.
HAGRID
Best not mention this ter anyone either, Harry.
EXT. DIAGON ALLEY - LATER - DAY
Harry and Hagrid exit the Apothecary, loaded with Harry's various purchases. Harry studies the list in his hand.
HARRY
I still need...a wand.
HAGRID
points ahead
Only place for wands, is Ollivanders. You go inside. I got one more thing I gotta'do.
Harry nods, walks into Ollivanders.
INT. OLLIVANDERS WAND SHOP - DAY
Harry and Hagrid stand in a very narrow shop where thousands of slender boxes are stacked to the ceiling. Hovering above them on a spindly ladder is a pale old man with eyes like silver moons. He is OLLIVANDER.
OLLIVANDER
I wondered when I'd be seeing you, Mr. Potter. Seems only yesterday your mother and father we're in here buying their first wands...
Ollivander steps down.with a pair of slender boxes.
OLLIVANDER
extending a box
Here we are. Just give it a wave.
Feeling a bit supid, Harry raises his arm. Nothing.
OLLIVANDER
No. Apparently not. Perhaps this.
Harry raises it and...BRIGHT LIGHT shoots forth...sending a CRYSTAL VASE OF BLACK ROSES shattering to the floor.
OLLIVANDER
No. No. Definitely not. No Matter. After all...it's the wand that chooses the wizard.
INT. OLLIVANDERS WAND SHOP - LATER
HUNDREDS OF WAND BOXES lie at Harry's feet. Hagrid, eyes heavy, sits on a spindly chair. Ollivander, meanwhile, stands at the top of a spindly ladder, eyeing his inventory.
OLLIVANDER
I wonder...
Ollivander descends, presents a box. Stifling a yawn, Harry takes the wand...and his expression changes.
OLLIVANDER
Go on then.
As Harry extends his arm his hand trembles. A breeze stirs, sending the shop's tiny bell RINGING. The pages of a BOOK FLUTTER on the counter, and Harry's hair feathers off his forehead, showing his scar. Astounded, Harry smiles and then.. .Ollivander slips the wand from his fingers and the breeze dies, the shop returning to its eerie calm.
OLLIVANDER.
Curious. Very curious...
HARRY
Sorry, but what's curious?
OLLIVANDER
I remember every wand I've ever sold, Mr. Potter. It so happens that the phoenix whose tail feather resides in your wand, gave another feather. Just one other. It's curious that you should be destined for this wand when its brother...
eyes shifting
...gave you that scar.
HARRY
And who owned that wand?
Ollivander exchanges a surprised glance with Hagrid.
HAGRID
We don't speak his name, Harry.
OLLIVANDER
As I said, the wand chooses the wizard, Mr. Potter. It's not always clear why. But I think it's clear we can expect great things from you. After all, He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named did great things.
Ollivander slides the lid on the box, hands it to Harry.
OLLIVANDER
Terrible, yes. But great.
Harry looks out the window, sees Hagrid standing there, bolding a cage with a snow white Owl inside. Harry turns to say goodbye to Ollivander. He's gone. Harry runs outside.
EXT. DIAGON ALLEY - DAY
Harry runs up to Hagrid, looks at the owl.
HAGRID
Happy Birthday, Harry.
HARRY
excited
For me?...Really?...He's Mine?...
HAGRID
Crikey, yeh'd think yeh hadn't gotten a birthday present before.
HARRY
I haven't. Not really.
INT. LEAKY CAULDRON
Hagrid and Harry sit at a table in the corner. Hagrid dips a spoon into a huge bowl of soup, looks up.
HAGRID
You all right, Harry? Yer very quiet.
HARRY
touching his scar
He killed my parents, didn't he? The one who gave me this. You know, Hagrid. I know you do.
Hagrid studies Harry, conflicted, then sets down his spoon.
HAGRID.
'Course I know. Who do yeh think carried yeh out o' yer parents' house, Hallowe'en night, ten years ago? Who do yeh think brought yeh ter Dumbledore an' watched him lay yeh on yer Aunt an' Uncle's doorstep? 'Course I know, Harry.
Hagrid leans in closer, his eyes glimmering in the dim pub.
HAGRID
Firs', un'erstand this, 'cause it's important: not all yer wizards are good. Some go bad. Years ago, there was this one wizard who went as bad as you could go. His name was...was...
HARRY
Maybe if you wrote it down.
HAGRID
Nah—can' spell it. All right—Voldemort.
HARRY
Voldemort?
Hagrid shivers, holds up his hand, and glances quickly about the shadows of the pub before continuing.
HAGRID
Dark days those were, Harry. Volde...You-Know-Who...started lookin' fer followers. Got 'em too. Anyone that stood up to him ended up dead. Including yer parents. No one lived once he decided to kill 'em. Not one. 'Cept you.
HARRY
Me? Voldemort tried to kill me?
HAGRID
That's no ord'nary cut on your forehead. A mark like that only comes when yeh've been touched by a curse. An evil curse.
Just then, a HIGH, CACKLING VOICE pierces the silence. Harry turns, sees an OLD WOMAN laughing with the gummy bartender.
HARRY
But what happened to Vol...to You-Know-Who?
HAGRID
Some say he died. Codswallop, in my opinion. I reckon he's out there somewhere, jus' too weak to carry on. But one thing's fer certain, Harry. Somethin' about you stumped him that night. That's why you're famous. That's why e'ryone knows yer name.
Hagrid leans close once more and t-Ms time his voice is barely a WHISPER.
HAGRID
You're the boy who lived.
EXT. KING'S CROSS STATION - DAHN
Harry and Hagrid, laden with a heavy TRUNK and SNOWY OWL, stand outside the station in the shimmering dawn light.
Hagrid checks his WATCH, looks suddenly urgent.
HAGRID
Blimey, look at the time. 'Fraid I 'ave ter be leavin' yeh now, Harry. Dumbledore will be wantin'—
Hagrid pats his LEFT POCKET. Catches himself.
HAGRID
He'll be wantin' ter see me.
handing him a TICKET
That there's yer train. Leaves in about ten minutes time. Jus' make sure yeh stick ter yeh ticket. That's very important, Harry. Stick ter yeh ticket...
HARRY
There must be something wrong, Hagrid. This says Platform Nine and Three Quarters. There's no such thing...
Harry looks up, but Hagrid...is gone.
HARRY
...Is there?
INT. LOWER LEVEL - KING'S CROSS - MOMENTS LATER
Harry dashes through a bustling King's Cross, sledding to a halt in front of a pair of PLATFORM SIGNS. One reads NINE. One reads TEN. Harry turns to a passing STATION OFFICER.
HARRY
Excuse me. Can you tell me where I might find Platform Nine and Three-Quarters.
STATION OFFICER
grumbling off
Think you're funny, do you? Nine and Three-Quarters indeed...
Harry looks about, despairingly, then HEARS...
MRS. WEASLEY (O.S.)
...packed with Muggles, of course.
Harry turns, sees a plump woman (MRS. WEASLEY) hurrying along FOUR RED-HEADED BOYS and their little, red-headed sister (GINNY). The boys all tow trunks identical to Harry's.
MRS. WEASLEY
All right, Percy. You first.
Harry watches the tallest boy walk straight toward a dividing barrier.and...VANISH. Harry squints in confusion. Next, Mrs. Weasley turns to a pair of cheeky twins (FRED and GEORGE).
MRS. WEASLEY
Fred. You next.
FRED
I'm not Fred. I'm George. Honestly, woman, you call yourself our mother?
MRS. WEASLEY
Sorry, George.
FRED
Only joking. I am Fred.
Fred dashes off, trailed by George. They too vanish.
HARRY
Excuse me. Could you tell me—
MRS. WEASLEY
How to get onto the platform? Not to worry, dear. It's Ron's first time to Hogwarts as well.
Harry looks at the youngest red-haired boy. He is tall, gangly, and presently has a SMUDGE on his nose.
MRS. WEASLEY
"All you have to do is walk straight at the barrier between Platforms Nine and Ten. Focus...but don't stop and don't be scared you'll crash into it either. Best do it at a bit of a run if you're nervous.
Harry looks. Shrugs. ‘Sprinting at full speed, the barrier coming closer and closer, he shuts his eyes and...
EXT. PLATFORM NINE AND THREE QUARTERS - DAY
...SLEDS onto a platform milling with people. A sign above reads HOGWARTS EXPRESS. Below it sits a SCARLET STEAM ENGINE.. Harry glances behind, sees a wrought-iron archway where the barrier had been, with the words PLATFORM NINE AND THREE QUARTERS on it. Just beyond, he sees Kings Cross and the world he's left behind.
NEW ANGLE ON PLATFORM
Harry struggles with his heavy trunk as all around him people say goodbye to their families. A round-faced boy (NEVILLE LONGBOTTOM) turns frantically to his GRAN.
NEVILLE
Gran! I've lost my toad again.
GRAN
Oh, Neville. Honestly. Not again...
Further up, a BOY IN DREADLOCKS (LEE JORDAN) holds a BOX.
STUDENT
Go on, Lee. Give us a look.
As Lee lifts the LID, a LONG HAIRY LEG protrudes and students SHRIEK. Unimpressed, one of the twins spots Harry struggling.
GEORGE
Want a hand?
HARRY
Yes, please.
GEORGE
Oy! C'mere, Fred! Take a handle.
EXT. PLATFORM - FURTHER ALONG - SECONDS LATER
Fred and George heave Harry's trunk atop other, similar trunks while Harry sets Hedwig with the owls. Harry wipes his sweaty hair off his brow...revealing his scar.
HARRY
Thanks very much.
GEORGE
Blimey. You're...
FRED
Harry Potter.
HARRY
What? Oh, him. Yes. I mean, I am.
MRS. WEASLEY
Fred! George! Come say goodbye to Ginny.
Mrs. Weasley stands waving, the redheaded girl clinging to her dress. The twins take one last look at Harry, dash off.
INT. TRAIN COMPARTMENT/EXT. PLATFORM - DAY
Harry exits the crush of the aisle, enters an empty compartment. Very much alone, he sits, peers out the window as Percy Weasley strides forth in billowing BLACK ROBES.
PERCY
Have to go, Mother. The other Prefects are expecting me up front.
FRED
Mum! Guess who’s on the train? Right now.
FRED/GEORGE
Harry Potter!
GINNY
Oh, Mum, can I go on and see him? Please.
MRS. WEASLEY
Certainly not. The boy isn't something you goggle at in a zoo.
as the WHISTLE BLOWS
All right, on you go, all of you. Ron, what is that on your nose?
She goes for a handkerchief, but Ron spins away. She sighs, calls after the twins.
MRS. WEASLEY
You two watch out for your brother. And behave yourselves this year..If I get one more owl telling me you've blown up a toilet or something--
FRED
Blown up a toilet? We've never blown up a toilet.
GEORGE
Great idea, though, thanks, Mum!
EXT. HOGWARTS EXPRESS - DAY
As the train moves out of the station, Ginny chases after.
Harry watches her from his' window until she drops back. King's Cross, and the life he's known, drift away.
EXT. SCOTLAND - HOGWARTS EXPRESS - DAY
The train whips past fields, small country lanes.
INT. TRAIN COMPARTMENT - DAY
Harry sits quietly. Then the compartment door slides open. Ron stands there. Seeing Harry, he hesitates.
RON
Mind? Everywhere else is full.
HARRY
Not at all.
RON
I’m Ron, by the way.
HARRY
I heard. I’m Harry.
RON
I...heard.
unable to resist
Is it true? I mean, have you really got the...you know...
Without prompting, Harry lifts his hair.. Shows the scar.
RON
Wicked.
HARRY
Are all your family wizards?
RON
Huh? Oh. I think so. Well, Mum's got a second cousin who's an accountant. But we never talk about him. I heard you went to live with Muggles. What are they like?
HARRY
Horrible. Well, not all of them. Mine are, though. Trade them for three wizard brothers any day.
RON
Five. I'm the sixth in our family to go to Hogwarts. Everyone expects me to do as well as the others. But if I do, it's no big deal because they did it first. You never get anything new, either, with five brothers. I've got Bill's old robes. Charlie's old wand. Even Scabbers used to be Percy's...
Ron reaches into his pocket, pulls out a fat, gray, seemingly unconscious, RAT (SCABBERS).
RON
Hardly ever wakes up. He's useless basically. Percy got an owl for making Prefect, but Mum and Dad couldn't afford-- I mean, I got Scabbers instead.
Roh looks embarrassed. Just then, a DIMPLED WOMAN pushing a TROLLEY FULL OF SWEETS pops her head in.
DIMPLED WOMAN
Anything off the trolley, dears?
Ron mumbles 'No thanks,' takes out a lumpy sandwich. Harry studies him, then digs into his pockets, heavy with coin.
HARRY
We'll take the lot.
CLOSE UP: TROVE OF TREATS
INT. TRAIN COMPARTMENT - DAY (LATER)
...spread out on an empty seat. Harry marvels at the strange, wondrous candies before him.
HARRY
'Bertie Bott's Every Flavor Beans'?
RON
They mean every flavor. There's chocolate, peppermint...but you can also get liver or spinach or tripe. George reckons he had a bogey-flavored one once.
HARRY
These aren't real frogs, are they?
Harry holds up a pack of "CHOCOLATE FROGS"—something is wriggling under the foil—then sees that Ron already has a very realistic leg squirreling out the corner of his mouth.
RON
mumbling
Just a spell. Besides, it's the card you want. Each pack's got a Famous Witch or Wizard. Got about 500 myself. Watch it!
As Harry breaks the foil on his pack, the frog springs into the air and out the open train window.
RON
That's rotten luck. They've only got one good jump in them to begin with.
Harry glances at the card in his hand. On it, there's a MAN with a crooked nose, long silver beard, and half-moon glasses. Underneath is a name: ALBUS DUMBLEDORE.
HARRY
I've gotten Dumbledore!
RON
I've about six of him. Trade you Scabbers though, if you get Agrippa or Ptolemy.
HARRY
reading the back
'Considered by many the greatest wizard of modern times, Dumbledore is particularly famous for his defeat of the dark wizard Grindelwald in 1945, for his discovery of the 12 uses of dragon's blood, and his work on alchemy with his partner, Nicolas Flamel. Approximately one hundred and fifty years old, Professor Dumbledore enjoys chamber music, tenpin bowling, and...
looking up
One hundred and fifty years old?
RON
Thought he'd be older, did you?
HARRY
No--I--Hey, he's gone.
Harry holds up the cardn-now blank--to Ron, who only shrugs.
RON
Well, you can't expect him to hang around all day, can you?
HARRY
It's just, in the Muggle world, people stay put in photos.
RON
Really? They don't move at all? Weird!
Just then, Scabbers SNORTS, falls back asleep.
RON
Pathetic, isn't it? Fred gave me a spell that's to turn him yellow. Want to see?
Harry nods, eager to see some magic. Ron pulls out a BATTERED WAND--just as the compartment door OPENS and a GIRL with bushy brown hair and rather large front teeth looks in. She is HERMIONE GRANGER and is already wearing her school robes.
HERMIONE
Has anyone seen a toad? A boy named Neville has lost one.
seeing Ron's wand
Oh, are you doing magic? Let's see then.
She sits down. Ron looks a bit taken aback, but clears his throat nonetheless, poises his wand over Scabbers.
RON
Sunshine, daisies, butter mellow, Turn this stupid, fat rat yellow.
Scabbers SNORTS, but otherwise remains fat, grey, and asleep.
HERMIONE
Are you sure that's a real spell? Well, it's not very good, is it? I've only tried a few simple ones myself but they've all worked for me. For example...
To Harry's surprise, Hermione takes her wand, points it directly over his brow, then...stops.
HERMIONE
Goodness. You're Harry Potter, aren't you? I know all about you, of course. I was doing a little recreational reading and you're in Modern Magical History, The Rise and Fall of the Dark Arts and Great Wizarding Events of the 20th Century.
HARRY
Am I?
HERMIONE
Didn't you know? I'd have found out everything I could if it was me.
raising her wand
Anyway...Oculus Reparo.
instantly, the cracked bridge of Harry's glasses is mended.
HERMIONE
There. That's better, isn't it? I'm Hermione Granger, by the way. And you are...?
Ron is still staring at the glasses, feeling a bit outdone.
RON
Um...Ron Weasley.
HERMIONE
Pleasure. Do either of you know what House you'll be in? I'm hoping for Gryffindor--I hear Dumbledore himself was in it--but I think I might just die if they put me in Slytherin. That was You-Know-Who's House. Anyway, you two had better change into your robes. I expect we'll be arriving soon. You've got dirt on your nose, by the way, did you know?
As she exits, Harry and Ron just sit, staring at the door.
EXT. HOGSHEADS STATION - HOGWARTS - NIGHT
As the scarlet engine HISSES to a stop, Harry and the others spill out. Harry's robes shimmer grandly, while Ron's secondhand silks show a bit too much sneaker.
HAGRID
Firs' years! Firs' years over here!
Hagrid gives Harry a wink as he comes loping out of the darkness, swinging a LAMP. Ron, preoccupied with wiping his nose clean on his robes, stops, dumbstruck by Hagrid's size.
EXT. BLACK LAKE - NIGHT - MOMENTS LATER
A FLEET of TINY BOATS glides silently over a glassy lake. Harry rides with Ron, Hermione and Neville Longbottom, gazing at the DARK TREES of the FOREST that surrounds them. A GLINT OF SILVER flickers through the black trees, like a dream. Harry watches, transfixed, then...
HAGRID
You there! Don' be trailin' yer fingers in the water. Yeh might find yeh don' get 'em all back.
Harry turns, sees that Hagrid is speaking to a POINTY-FACED BOY (DRACO MALFOY). Malfoy eyes Hagrid darkly, whispers to a PAIR OF THICK-LOOKING BOYS (CRABBE and GOYLE).
Harry peers into the black water, sees his own pale face looking back, then a soft GLITTER of REFLECTED LIGHT dances on the surface. He looks up, watches a magnificent CASTLE drift into view. Hogwarts.
INT. ENTRANCE HALL - HOGWARTS CASTLE - NIGHT
Harry and the others enter a grand entryway lit with flaming torches. PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL, a rather severe-looking witch in an emerald cloak, stands before a pair of TOWERING DOORS.
She lifts her chin, surveys the new students.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Welcome to Hogwarts. In a moment, you will pass through these doors and join your classmates, but before you can take your seats, you must be sorted into your Houses. They are Gryffindor, Hufflepuff, Ravenclaw, and Slytherin. While here, your House is, in many ways, your family. Your triumphs will earn your House points, while any rule-breaking will lose points. At the end of the year, the House with the most is awarded the House Cup, a great honor. I hope each of you...
Just then, a rather LARGE TOAD springs forth, CROAKS.
NEVILLE
Trevor!
Neville, blissfully relieved, gathers his toad, then peers up from the hem of Professor McGonagall's robes.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
...will be a credit to whichever House becomes yours. The Sorting Ceremony will begin momentarily.
Professor McGonagall glowers at Neville, then exits. As she goes, there is a BRIEF CLAMOR of SOUND from the students waiting in the Great Hall beyond.
HARRY
How exactly do they sort us?
RON
Some kind of test, I think. Fred says it hurts like hell, but I'm sure he was joking. At least...I think he was.
Just then, Draco Malfoy pushes through the crowd, shadowed by the boys from the boat. Malfoy stares openly at Harry's scar.
MALFOY
It's true then, what they were saying on the train. Harry Potter has come to Hogwarts.
Harry's eyes slide, appraise the other two boys.
MALFOY
Oh. This is Crabbe and Goyle. And my name's Malfoy. Draco Malfoy.
Ron COUGHS, masking a snigger. Malfoy's eyes narrow.
MALFOY
Think my name's funny, do you? No need to ask yours. Red hair, freckles, and a hand-me-ddwn robe--you must be a Weasley.
to Harry
You'll soon find out some wizarding families are better than others, Potter. You don't want to go making friends with the wrong sort. I can help you there.
Malfoy extends his hand, but Harry's gaze remains level.
HARRY
I think I can tell the wrong sort for myself, thanks.
Malfoy's eyes glitter with rage. Finally he drops his hand, turns away.
HERMIONE
Well, he's rather disagreeable, isn't he?
Ron and Harry turn, see Hermione. Just then, Professor McGonagall returns.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
We are ready for you.
INT. GREAT HALL - NIGHT
Harry and the others file into a strangely splendid place lit by THOUSANDS OF CANDLES FLOATING in midair over four long tables lined with students. Harry looks to the windows below the ceiling, finds glorious stars and an icy blue moon.
HERMIONE
It's not real, the ceiling. It's only bewitched to look like the night sky. I read about it in Hogwarts, A History.
Professor McGonagall sweeps to the front of the room where a WIZARD'S HAT—patched and frayed—sits on a stool.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Before we begin, Professor Dumbledore would like to say a few words.
Harry watches with great interest as the great wizard himself rises from his seat at the High Table.
DUMBLEDORE
Yes, and here they are: Nitwit! Blubber! Oddment! Tweak! Thank you!
The Great Hall THUNDERS with APPLAUSE.
HERMIONE
I hear he's a genius.
As the applause subsides, the hat TWITCHES. At the brim, a rip OPENS WIDE, and the hat begins to TALK.
SORTING HAT
Oh, you may not think I'm pretty But don't judge on what you see I'll eat myself if you can find
A smarter hat than me. There's nothing hidden in your head The Sorting Hat can't see So try me on and I will tell you Where you ought to be....
As the students APPLAUD, the hat takes a bow and Professor McGonagall: steps forward with a ROLL OF PARCHMENT.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
When I call your name, you will come forth, put on the hat and be sorted.
consulting her list
Hermione Granger.
HERMIONE
Oh dear. Here it is, isn't it? The moment. Goodness. What if the hat says nothing and we're all just left standing here forever...
RON
as she goes mumbling off
Mental, that one. I'm telling you.
Both watch Hermione seat herself, lower the Hat.
SORTING HAT
GRYFFINDOR!
Percy pulls out a chair for Hermione at the Gryffindor table.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Draco Malfoy.
RON
Slytherin.
Draco Malfoy swaggers forth and grips the hat. He's barely touched it to his head, when:
SORTING HAT
SLYTHERIN!
RON
off Harry's amazement
There's not a witch or wizard who went bad who wasn't in Slytherin. Draco's father was one of the first to join You-Know-Who when he got power. And one of the first to come back when he lost it.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Susan Bones.
As SUSAN BONES dashes up front, Harry glances to the High Table. Dumbledore watches the proceedings placidly, while Professor Quirrell talks to a hook-nosed man with greasy black hair and sallow skin, PROFESSOR SNAPE. Slowly, as if he can feel Harry's gaze, Snape turns, looks straight into Harry's eyes. Instantly, a Sharp, hot PAIN shoots across Harry's scar.
HARRY
Ouch!
RON
Harry? What is it?
HARRY
N-nothing. I'm fine.
SORTING HAT
Hufflepuff!
As Susan Bones runs off...
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Ronald Weasley.
As Ron steps nervously away, Harry glances back to the High Table. Shape has returned to his conversation.
SORTING HAT
Gryffindor!
Fred and George WHOOP LOUDLY as Ron comes grinning out of the hat, greatly relieved. Harry starts to clap himself when...
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Harry Potter.
There is an abrupt drop in the CHATTER. As Harry makes his way, he avoids the eyes of the many who stare and whisper.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
If you will, Mr. Potter.
Harry sits, takes the hat, and...slowly...lowers it. He waits, then the hat begins to SPEAK.
SORTING HAT
Hmmm. Difficult. Very Difficult. Plenty of courage, I see. Not a bad mind either. There's talent, oh yes, and a thirst to prove yourself. But where to put you...?
Harry grips the edge of the stool, closes his eyes. His lips move ever so slightly: Not Slytherin. Not Slytherin.
SORTING HAT
Not Slytherin, eh? Are you sure? You could be great, you know, it's all here in your head, and Slytherin will help you on the way to greatness, no doubt about that... No? Well, if you're sure better be GRYFFINDOR!
A ROAR erupts from the Gryffindor table. Harry stands shakily and walks to his table, where Percy, the Weasley twins, and Hermione all welcome him. At the High Table, Dumbledore lifts his goblet and, meeting Harry's eyes...nods.
INT. GREAT HALL - LATER
Freshly sorted and seated, the Gryffindor first years watch in amazement as the empty plates before them suddenly...fill with food. There is roast beef, chicken, pork chops, lamb chops, sausages, bacon, steak—the feast of all feasts. Harry listens as a rather wild-looking boy named SEAMUS talks to another student, DEAN THOMAS.
SEAMUS
I'm half and half. Me dad's a Muggle, Mam's a witch. Bit of a nasty shock for him when he found out.
As Percy leans over to pour a strange liquid into Harry's goblet, Harry nods to the High Table, to Professor Snape.
HARRY
Say, Percy. Who's that teacher talking to Professor Quirrell?
PERCY
Hm? Oh. Professor Snape. Head of Slytherin House.
HARRY
What's he teach?
PERCY
Potions. But everyone knows it's the Dark Arts he fancies. Been after Quirrell's job for years.
Just then, several STUDENTS SHRIEK as a volley of GHOSTS stream into the hall overhead. One swoops down.
PERCY
Hello, Sir Nicolas. Have a nice summer?
NEARLY HEADLESS NICK
Dismal. What with the Slytherins winning the House Cup six years in a row, the Bloody Baron's become unbearable.
Nick nods his head in the direction of the Slytherin table, where a horrific, BLOOD-STAINED GHOST hovers imperiously.
NEARLY HEADLESS NICK
Then again, he's always been unbearable.
RON
I know you. You're Nearly Headless Nick.
NEARLY HEADLESS NICK
I prefer Sir Nicolas, if you don't mind.
HERMIONE
Nearly headless? How can you be nearly headless?
NEARLY HEADLESS NICK
Like this.
Seizing himself by the left ear, Nick swings his ENTIRE HEAD off his neck and onto his shoulder, as if it were on a hinge.
NEVILLE
blanching
I think I'm done eating.
Just then, Dumbledore rises at the High Table.
DUMBLEDORE
If I may, I have a few start-of-term notices to announce. First Years should note that the. Dark Forest is strictly forbidden to all pupils. Also, our caretaker, Mr. Filch has asked me to remind you that...
FILCH, a sour-looking man, stands near a side exit while MRS. NORRIS, a cat with glittering RED EYES, sits by his feet.
DUMBLEDORE
...no magic should be used between classes in the corridors. And finally, please note that this year, the third floor corridor on the right hand side is out of bounds to everyone who does not wish to die a most painful death.
Hearing this, Ron stops chewing for the first time, glances at Harry. But before either can speak...
DUMBLEDORE
And now, let us sing the school song! Everyone pick their favorite tune and off we go!
Professor McGonagall rolls her eyes slightly as Dumbledore wields his wand. Consulting the PARCHMENT of LYRICS placed beside their plates, Harry and his fellow First Years join a rousing, but rather dischordant, chorus of VOICES.
SCHOOL SINGING
Hogwarts, Hogwarts, Hoggy Warty Hogwarts Teach us things worth knowing Bring back what we've forgot. Just do your best, we'll do the rest And learn until our brains all rot...
INT. MARBLE STAIRCASE - HOGWARTS - LATER - NIGHT
As the new Gryffindors follow Percy up the staircase, Harry stares in wonderment at the PORTRAITS on the walls: the people in them MOVE.
PERCY
This is the most direct path to the dormitory, except on Fridays, of course, when the staircases...change.
As the staircase before them moves to the right, Percy waits briefly, then leads on without comment to a...
INT. 7TH FLOOR CORRIDOR - MOMENTS LATER - NIGHT
... a new corridor. Up ahead, Harry spies a bundle of WALKING STICKS floating in midair. Without warning, the walking sticks come flying forth. As the First Years duck and dodge, Percy sighs in annoyance.
PERCY
Gryffindors, I give you Peeves, Hogwarts resident poltergeist.
POP! A tiny translucent man with wicked eyes and wide mouth appears, clutching the last walking stick. He is PEEVES.
PEEVES
Oooh! Ickle Firsties! What fun!
With that, Peeves swoops off, wagging his tongue and bouncing a walking stick off Neville's head.
PERCY
walking on
Rather a nuisance, I'm afraid. Ah. Here we are.
At the very end of the corridor, hangs a PORTRAIT of a WOMAN in a pink silk dress. She looks at Percy.
PINK LADY
Password?
PERCY
Caput Draconis.
The portrait SWINGS FORWARD, revealing a ROUND HOLE in the wall. The students all scramble through it, into the...
INT. GRYFFINDOR COMMON ROOM - NIGHT
The students enter a cozy, round room, filled with squashy armchairs. At the top of a SPIRAL STAIRCASE, are two DOORS.
PERCY
Girls' dormitory to the left. Boys to the right. You'll find your belongings have already been brought up. Any questions?
no one speaks
Then, goodnight all. Oh, and don't forget. Before retiring, please place all living potion ingredients in your cupboards. This includes slugs, fire beetles and cutworms. Sweet dreams...
INT. BOYS TOWER DORMITORY - LATER - NIGHT
Moonlight falls through the tower windows as Ron, Neville arid Seamus slumber. As we find Harry, he is sleeping too, but it is not restful. He twitches and turns... there is a FLASH OF GREEN...then he awakens with a start, sits up. Trembling. He glances about the room, then lies slowly back. Eyes open.
INT. STAIRWAY - 12 NORTH - HOGWARTS - MORNING
The stairway bustles with students as Harry and Ron make their way. Clearly lost, Ron consults his TIMETABLE.
RON
This is Staircase Twelve North, which should take us to Backward Staircase Seven—no wait a minute, we're on Backward Staircase Seven...
HARRY
How many staircases are there?
HERMIONE
One hundred forty-two, though, in A History of Magic, Bathilda Bagshot makes unattributed reference to three others.
Harry arid Ron watch Hermione pass by, apparently holding every single First Year course book in her arms.
RON
I hate her.
INT. MCGONAGALL'S CLASSROOM - MORNING
Students sit attentively, looking front...at a CAT. Its markings, particularly around the eyes, are somehow familiar. Harry and Ron burst in, glance around.
RON
Whew! We made it, mate. Can you imagine old McGonagall's face if we were late first day out...
Hearing this, the cat narrows its eyes, leaps up and...TRANSFORMS...into old McGonagall herself. Ron's mouth drops open in amazement.
RON
That was bloody brilliant!
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Thank you for that assessment, Mr. Weasley. But perhaps it might be more useful if I transfigured Mr. Potter or yourself into a pocket watch. That way one of you might be on time.
HARRY
We got lost.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Then perhaps a map. I trust you don't need one to find your seats?
Harry and Ron Slink past Hermione, sitting front row center.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Transfiguration is some of the most complex, dangerous and valuable magic you will learn at Hogwarts. Use it skillfully and it may, one day, save your life. Make a mistake and you could find yourself with a toad's head and a monkey's tail.
opening a textbook
All right then. Shall we?
Harry and Ron exchange a glance, whip open their books.
INT. DUNGEONS - POTIONS - NEXT MORNING - DAY
As Professor Snape paces imperiously, Harry and the others sit in dead silence, eyes wandering to the PICKLED ANIMALS floating in GLASS JARS along the cold stone walls.
SNAPE
There will be no foolish wand waving or silly incantations in this class. As such, I don't expect many of you to appreciate the subtle science and exact art that is potion making. However, for those select few...
glances at Malfoy
...who possess the predisposition, I can teach you how to bewitch the mind and ensnare the senses. I can tell you howto bottle fame, brew glory, even stopper death. Then again, maybe some of you have come to Hogwarts in possession of abilities so formidable that you feel confident enough to...not pay attention.
Harry blinks, realizes Snape is looking at him.
SNAPE
Mr. Potter. Our hew...celebrity. Tell me. What would I get if I added powdered root of asphodel to an infusion of wormwood?
Harry looks at a loss. Hermione’s hand shoots into the air.
SNAPE
You don't know. Well, let's try again. Where, Mr. Potter, would you look if I told you to find me a bezoar?
HARRY
I don't know, sir.
SNAPE
And the difference between monkshood and wolfsbane?
Harry sees Malfoy, Crabbe and Goyle sniggering.
HARRY
I don't know, sir.
SNAPE
Pity. Clearly fame isn't everything, is it, Mr. Potter.
HARRY
Clearly Hermione knows. It seems a pity not to ask her..
Neville, Seamus and a few other Gryffindors LAUGH.
SNAPE
Silence! And put your hand down, you silly girl!
Hermione wilts. Snape steps toward Harry, eyes glimmering.
SNAPE
For your information, Potter, asphodel and wormwood make a sleeping potion so powerful it is know as the Draught of the Living Dead. A bezoar is a stone taken from the stomach of a goat and it will save you from most poisons. As for monkshood and wolfbane, they are the same plant, which also goes by the name of aconite.
to the others
Well, why aren't you all copying this down?
The students scramble for their quills and parchment.
SNAPE
And Gryffindors. Note that five points will be taken from your House for your classmate's cheek.
INT. GREAT HALL - LATER - DAY
Harry stares glumly at the FOUR HOURGLASSES as the PRECIOUS GEMS drop in Gryffindor's, rise in Slytherin's. Down the table, Seamus is MUTTERING.
SEAMUS
Eye of rabbit, harp string hum...
HARRY
What’s Seamus trying to do to that glass of water?
RON
Turn it to rum. Actually managed a weak tea yesterday before it...
PFFFT! BLUE FLAMES shoot over the rim of the glass.
RON
Two Knuts says he loses his eyebrows by week's end. Ah, mail's here.
DOZENS OF OWLS circle the ceiling, then swoop down, dropping parcels from home. A copy of The Daily Prophet rolls onto the table near Harry.
RON
Hey look! Neville's gotten a Remembrall!
Neville holds a GLASS BALL filled with WHITE SMOKE. Slowly, the smoke begins to turn a DEEP SCARLET.
HERMIONE
I've read about those. If the smoke turns red it means you've forgotten something.
NEVILLE
Only problem is...I can't remember what I've forgotten.
Harry, Daily Prophet in hand, nudges Ron.
HARRY
Hey, Ron. Somebody broke into Gringotts! Listen: 'Believed to be the work of Dark wizards or witches unknown, Gringotts goblins, while acknowleging the breach, insist nothing was taken. The vault in question had, in fact, been emptied earlier that very same day.' That’s odd.
RON
It’s mad. Dad says there are dragons guarding some of the vaults.
HARRY
No. It’s just odd...That’s the day Hagrid and I were there.
EXT. THE GROUNDS - HOGWARTS - DAY
Harry stands in a cluster of Gryffindors, across from Malfoy and his Slytherin cronies. Between them, there is a LONG LINE OF BROOMSTICKS. MADAME HOOCH, a rangy witch with short grey hair and hawk-like eyes, stands between the two groups.
MADAME HOOCH
Welcome to your first Flying Lesson. Well, what are you all waiting for? Everyone step up to a broomstick. Come now. Hurry up.
Harry steps forward nervously, glances down. His broom is old, with twigs sticking out at odd angles.
MADAME HOOCH
Stick out your right hand, Over the broom, and say "Up"!
SHOUTS of "Up!" ring on the cold afternoon air. Though he barely WHISPERS the command, Harry’s broom SNAPS smartly into his hand. Hermione's simply rolls over. Ron's FLIES UP and CRACKS HIM IN THE NOSE.
MADAME HOOCH
Now. Once you’ve got hold of the broom, I want you to mount it. And grip it tight. We don't want you sliding off the end.
walking the row
Your other right hand, Mr. Finnegan. Goodness, boy, what have you done with your eyebrows?
SEAMUS
Lost 'em, ma'am.
MALFOY
Excuse me, Madam Hooch. Given that a few of us have been on sticks for years, would it not make sense to separate the expert flyers from...
glancing at Harry
...the neophytes?
MADAME HOOCH
Thank you, Mr. Malfoy, but I’m sure even an expert flyer such as yourself can appreciate the benefits of reacquainting oneself with the basics. Your grip, for example. It's thumb in, not out.
As Malfoy reddens, Harry and Ron share a grin.
MADAME HOOCH
Very well. Now when I blow my whistle, I want each of you to kick off from the ground. Hard. Keep your brooms steady, hover for a moment, then lean forward slightly and touch back down. On my whistle...Three...Two...
Jumping the gun entirely, a nervous Neville shoots straight up into the air, like a cork out of a bottle.
MADAME HOOCH
Mr. Longbottom! Exactly where do you think you're going?
Clutching desperately to his broom, Neville caroms crazily off a tree, flops upside down, rockets past the other students—who duck—then soars into a mad spiraling climb.
MADAME HOOCH
Come down here this instant!
Neville's pale face peers down, his eyes roll up...
MADAME HOOCH
On your broomstick, Longbottom!
Too late. With a giant THUD and a nasty CRACK, Neville hits the pitch. Madame Hooch and the Gryffindors rush over.
MADAME HOOCH
Broken wrist. Come on, dear. Up you get.
leading him off
Everyone's to keep their feet on the ground while I take Mr. Longbottom to the Hospital Wing. Understand? If I see a single broom in the air, the one riding it will find themselves out of Hogwarts before they can say 'Quidditch.'
As they go, Harry watches Neville's broom sail high over Hagrid's house, where the giant himself sits in the front garden, watching with a pair of BINOCULARS. Malfoy scoops Neville's Remembrall from the grass, cackles.
MALFOY
Did you see his face? Perhaps if the great lump had given this a squeeze, he would've remembered to fall on his fat arse.
HARRY
Give it here, Malfoy.
MALFOY
No, I think I'll leave it somewhere for Longbottom to find. How about up a tree?
Malfoy slings a leg over his broom, KICKS into the air.
MALFOY
What's the matter, Potter? A bit beyond your reach?
Harry glowers up at Malfoy, then GRABS his broom.
HERMIONE
Harry! No! You heard what Madame Hooch said. Besides you don't even know how to...fly.
Harry shoots into the sky, so angry that it's a moment before he realizes what the others see clearly: he's a natural. Turning his broomstick sharply, he hovers, glaring at Malfoy.
HARRY
Give it here. Or I'll knock you off that ruddy broom.
MALFOY
Is that so?
Harry SHOOTS forth like a javelin, Malfoy just managing to slip his charge. As Harry whips around, Malfoy glances down at the ground, clearly unnerved. Harry simply smiles.
MALFOY
Have it your way, then!
Malfoy hurls the ball high. As it plummets, Harry throws himself into a steep dive, rocketing recklessly downward, ignoring the earth as it rushes toward him, extending his hand and...snatching the ball only feet from the ground. He lands running, grinning, as the Gryffindors cheer. then...
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
HAR-RY POT-TER!
Harry's stomach drops. Malfoy grins hideously.
MALFOY
Chin up, Potter. They might let you stay on as Hagrid's assistant.
INT. CORRIDOR - HOGWARTS - MOMENTS LATER - DAY
Harry trails silently after Professor McGonagall.
INT. ADJOINING CLASSROOM - MOMENTS LATER
Professor McGonagall leans into an adjacent classroom.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Excuse me, Professor Quirrell, could I borrow Wood for a moment.
Startled, Professor Quirrell jumps, then OLIVER WOOD, a burly fifth-year, emerges, glances curiously at Harry.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Potter, this is Oliver Wood. Wood...I've found you a Seeker.
INT. CORRIDOR - HOGWARTS - EVENING
Harry and Ron walk, buffeted by the stream of students heading for dinner. Hermione walks a few steps behind.
RON
Seeker! But first years never make the House teams. You must be the youngest Quidditch player in--
HARRY
--a century. According to McGonagall.
Just then, Fred and George descend.
FRED
Well done, Harry. Wood's just told us.
RON
Fred and George are on the team too. Beaters.
GEORGE
Our job to make sure you don't get bloodied up too bad. Can't make any promises, of course. Rough game, Quidditch.
FRED
Brutal. But no one's died in years. Someone will vanish occasionally...
GEORGE
But they turn up in a month or two.
As the twins dash off, Ron reads Harry's troubled fade.
RON
Oh go on, Harry. Quidditch is great. Best game there is. And you'll be great too.
HARRY
But I've never even played Quidditch. What if I make a fool of myself?
HERMIONE
You won't make a fool of yourself.
Ron and Harry turn. They hadn't’even noticed Hermione.
HERMIONE
It's in your blood.
INT. TROPHY STAIRCASE - MOMENTS LATER
Hermione leads Harry and Ron to a DISPLAY CASE. Inside is a history of Quidditch at Hogwarts, with ancient brooms, strange equipment, and various TROPHIES. She points. Etched upon a SILVER TRAY, below a GRYFFINDOR LION, one NAME shines:
James Potter. Seeker.
RON
Harry...you didn't tell me your father was a Seeker too.
HARRY
I...didn't know.
INT. MARBLE STAIRCASE - MOMENTS LATER
As Harry and Ron trail Hermione up the staircase, Ron WHISPERS.
RON
I'm telling you, it's spooky. She knows more about you than you do.
HARRY
Who doesn't?
Just then, the staircase LURCHES beneath their feet...
INT. FORBIDDEN CORRIDOR - CONTINUOUS
...and transports them to a very dark, very creepy corridor.
RON
Does anybody feel like...we shouldn't be here?
HERMIONE
We're not supposed to be here. This is the Third Floor. It's forbidden.
HARRY
intrigued
Why, though?
HERMIONE
Because Dumbledore said so. Let's go.
Meow. They freeze. A CAT sits watching them, eyes glittering in the dark. Then...a SHADOW scales the wall.
FILCH (O.S.)
Who goes there!
They turn, dash the opposite way. As they reach a DOOR, Harry grips the knob, twists. It's LOCKED.
FILCH (O.S.)
Lead me to them, my sweet....
RON
That's it. We're done for.
HERMIONE
Oh, move over. Alohomora!
Hermione gives her wand a swish and...the door swings open.
Harry and Ron stare incredulously.
HERMIONE
Standard Book of Spells. Chapter Seven.
INT. FORBIDDEN ROOM - CONTINUOUS
As they fall inside, Hermione presses her ear to the door.
RON
Chapter Seven?
HERMIONE
Shhh! Filch is...gone.
RON
He probably thinks this door is locked.
HERMIONE
It was locked.
HARRY
And for good reason...
Hermione and Ron turn. Standing a feet away is a DOG...only this one has three heads, three pairs of mad, rolling eyes, and three sets of hideous yellow fangs dripping with saliva.
As the dog ROARS, they tumble back outside and...
INT. 3RD FLOOR CORRIDOR
...Harry FLINGS home the DOOR just before the dog throws itself against it. They exchange a glance, dash off.
INT. GRYFFINDOR COMMON ROOM - NIGHT
The Pink Lady frowns as they spill through, stand gasping.
RON
What do they think they're doing keeping a thing like that locked up in school?
HERMIONE
You don't use yqur eyes, do you? Didn't you see what it was standing on?
RON
I wasn't looking at its feet. I was a bit preoccupied with its heads. Or maybe you didn't notice. There were three.
HERMIONE
It was standing on a trapdoor, which means-it's not there by accident. It's...
HARRY
Guarding something.
HERMIONE
That's right. Now, if you don't mind, I think I'll go to bed before either of you figures out another clever way to get us killed. Or worse...expelled.
EXT. PRACTICE FIELD - DUSK
Harry stands with Oliver Wood on the empty practice pitch.
WOOD
Quidditch is easy enough to understand. Each team has seven players: Three Chasers, two Beaters, one Keeper and the Seeker—that's you. There are three kinds of balls. This one's called the Quaffle.
holds up a red ball
The Chasers handle the Quaffle and try to put it through one of three hoops. The Keeper—that's me—defends the hoops. With me so far?
Harry nods, points to a WOOD CRATE rocking Violently.
HARRY
I think so. What's in there?
WOOD
Here. Take this.
Wood hands Harry a SMALL CLUB, kneels before the crate, and unlashes a leather strap. Instantly, a BLACK BALL rockets into the sky, then, without warning, PLUMMETS straight down— at Harry's head. Startled, Harry jumps aside and—purely on instinct—clubs it back into the sky.
WOOD
Not bad, Potter. You'd make a fair Beater. Careful now, it's coming back.
As the ball screams back to earth, Wood crates it.
HARRY
What was that?
WOOD
Bludger. Nasty little buggers. But you're a Seeker. The only ball I want you to worry about is...this.
Wood takes out a TINY BALL about the size of a walnut. BRIGHT GOLD, it has little, fluttering WINGS.
HARRY
I like this ball.
WOOD
You like it now. Just wait. It's wicked fast and damn near impossible to see.
HARRY
What do I do with it?
WOOD
Catch it. Before the other team's Seeker. You catch this, the game is over. You catch this, Potter...we win.
INT. PROFESSOR FLITWICK'S CLASS - DAY
PROFESSOR FLITWICK, a very tiny, gnome-like wizard, stands on a PILE OF BOOKS as he oversees the class.
PROFESSOR FLITWICK
Now don't forget that nice wrist movement we've been, practising. Swish and flick. Swish and flick.
Harry, paired with Seamus, poses his wand over the FEATHER before him and begins to swish and flick.
HARRY
Wingardium Leviosa.
The feather flutters, but never leaves the table.
PROFESSOR FLITWICK
And enunciate! Never forget Wizard Baruffio, who said 's' instead of 'f' and found himself on the floor with a buffalo on his chest.
RON
WINGARDIUM LEVIOSA!
Ron windmills his arms grandly. Nothing. Hermione frowns.
HERMIONE
Honestly. You're going to take someone's eye out. Besides, you're saying it wrong. It's Levi-ohhhh-sa. Not Levi-o-saaaah.
RON
You do it then, if you're so clever.
HERMIONE
Wingardium Leviosa.
Hermione swishes and flicks. Instantly the feather rises.
PROFESSOR FLITWICK
Oh, well done! Everyone see here. Miss Granger's done it!
PFFFT! Across the room, SMOKE curls between Seamus and Harry.
HARRY
I think we’re going to need another feather over here, Professor.
INT. COURTYARD - LATER - DAY
As Harry and Ron cross the courtyard, Ron mimics Hermione.
RON
It'sLevi-ohhhhh-sa. Not Levi-o-saaaah. She's a nightmare, honestly. No wonder she hasn't got any friends.
JuSt then, someone BUMPS into Harry. He turns, sees Hermione dash by, hugging her books, eyes glittering; with tears.
HARRY
I think she heard you.
INT. GREAT HALL - NIGHT
Candlelit PUMPKINS flicker throughout the hall, while THOUSANDS OF LIVE BATS flutter overhead. Harry sits quietly, studying an EMPTY CHAIR, then sees Professor McGonagall standing across the way with Hagrid. Both are looking at him. McGonagall says something to Hagrid, who nods, then she steps away, approaches Harry.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
How are you, Potter? All right?
HARRY
Yes, Professor. Fine.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
I know...that is, we know...the members of the staff...that this is perhaps a difficult night for you. Halloween. Your parents...
Harry realizes what she is talking about. Nods.
HARRY
I'm all right, Professor.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Very well.
She turnsstarts to go.
HARRY
Professor...Thank you.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
You're welcome, Potter.
As she goes, Harry sees Ron glumly pushing his food around, listening to Neville speak across the EMPTY CHAIR to Seamus.
NEVILLE
Parvati Patil said she wouldn't come out of the girls' bathroom. Said she's been in there all afternoon. Crying.
Just then, Professor Quirrell runs into the room, CRIES OUT:
QUIRRELL
TROLL IN THE DUNGEON! TROLL IN THE
DUNGEON ! Thought you ought to know...
He faints to the floor. There is a brief silence, then utter pandemonium breaks out; Students SHRIEK. Bats SCREECH.
POP! POP! POP! The hall goes still, all eyes on Dumbledore, standing at the front, purple smoke trailing from his wand.
DUMBLEDORE
Everyone will please not panic. Prefects, lead your Houses back to the dormitories. Teachers, follow me to the dungeons.
INT. MARBLE STAIRCASE - MOMENTS LATER - NIGHT
As they follow Percy up the stairs, Ron still looks glum.
HARRY
How could a troll get in?
RON
Not on its own. Trolls are really stupid. Probably Peeves' playing jokes...
seeing Harry's face
What?
HARRY
Hermione. She doesn't know.
INT. GIRL'S BATHROOM CORRIDOR - MOMENTS LATER - NIGHT
Harry and Ron slip away from the Gryffindors, in with the Hufflepuffs, then down a deserted hallway. As FOOTSTEPS ring out, they duck behind a STONE GRIFFIN, see Snape hurry past.
HARRY
That's the third-floor he's going to. Teachers were supposed to go to the dungeons...
wrinkling his nose
What's that?
RON
Smells like Fred's socks. Only...worse.
Much worse. Lumbering toward them is a TROLL with an ENORMOUS CLUB. As it comes into a PATCH OF MOONLIGHT, it blinks stupidly, peers into a doorway, then slouches slowly inside.
Harry studies a SUIT OF ARMOR beside the door, thinks...
HARRY
Follow me.
Harry edges forward, pulls the SWORD from the suit of armor, and runs it through the door handle, trapping the troll.
RON
Yes!
Harry grins, then HEARS a high, petrified SCREAM.
HARRY
This wouldn't be the girl's bathroom, would it?
CUT TO:
CLOSE UP — HERMIONE SCREAMING
INT. GIRL’S BATHROOM - NIGHT
A HUGE SHADOW falls over Hermione’s face.
HERMIONE'S POV
...as the troll advances directly toward her.
She dashes into a stall, bolts the door. Trembling, she peers upw’ard.. .watching as...the troll's face appears over the top, looking in.
Panicked, she drops to the floor and shimmies into the next stall, out of Sight. Angered, the troll raises its club and—■ SMASH!--shatters the stall Hermione just vacated. As wood rains down in jagged, splintered pieces...
...Harry and Ron rush in, staring in horror as the troll raises the club high and SHATTERS the next stall.
Hermione, still crawling, covers her head and peers back.
SMASH! The club comes thundering down yet again, this time just inches from her foot.
RON
Don't worry, Hermione! We're here!
turning to Harry
She's dead.
HERMIONE
I heard that!
RON
What do we do?
HARRY
looking about frantically
Confuse it!
RON
Confuse it?
SHRUGGING
Hey, pea brain!
Harry and Ron grab anything they can arid begin to hurl it at the troll, but they might as well be throwing marshmallows.
As shards of wood bounce off its pint-sized head and great lumpy shoulders, the troll brings the club down once more and SHATTERS the last stall.
As Harry and Ron look on grimly, the troll jabs its club into the hash of wood before it, poking about for Hermione, when, at the last second...
...she scrambles out and dashes under the sink. GRUNTING furiously, the troll turns, begins to advance on her.
Harry, thinking fast, rushes forward and leaps upon the troll's rising club, rising himself...right out of FRAME...and then...dropping...
...right onto the troll's slimy neck. The troll blinks dimly and, before it can react, Harry—purely on instinct—shoves his wand straight up the troll's nose.
The troll ROARS in pain, dropping the club and stamping about. Ron watches helplessly, then glances at the club on the floor, an idea flickering across his face. Raising his wand, he SPEAKS:
RON
Wingardium Leviosa.
Harry swings around, sees Ron standing, wand poised. It does not inspire confidence. Ron looks at Hermione, takes a breath, and this time, employs the correct pronunciation.
RON
Wingardium LEVI-OHHHH-SA!
With that, the club quivers upon the floor...begins to rise. The troll, still raging, grabs Harry's leg and peels him off his body. As he holds Harry up high, suspended by one leg, Harry's world goes upside down, spinning, when...
...the club floats by his face. The troll pauses, watching in confusion as the club rises toward the ceiling, hanging in magical suspension until...
...THUNK! It drops smack on the troll's head. Wobbling, the troll releases its grip on Harry's leg and...
...drops him hard to the floor. Harry peers up. The troll wobbles one last time and starts to fall...directly on top of Harry. Quickly, Harry rolls away...
...just before the troll SLAMS to the floor, inches away.
All is quiet for a moment. Then Hermione steps forward.
HERMIONE
Is it--dead?
HARRY
I don't think so. Just knocked out.
RON
No need to kill it, after all.
HARRY
Yes, well, that was big of you. Ugh. Troll snot.
Harry extracts his wand, wipes it on the troll's trousers. A sudden VOLLEY of FOOTSTEPS announces the arrival of Professors McGonagall, Snape, and a still queasy Quirrell. Harry notices a SPOT OF BLOOD on Snape's leg, sees Snape shift his cloak to cover it.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Explain yourselves! Both of you.
HERMIONE
It's my fault, Professor McGonagall.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Miss Granger!
HERMIONE
I went looking for the troll. I've read about them and thought I could handle it. But I was wrong. If Harry and Ron hadn't come along...I'd be dead.
Ron drops his wand, stunned by Hermione's lie.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
I'm very disappointed in you, Miss Granger. Five points will be taken from Gryffindor for your very serious lack of judgement. As for you gentlemen, I hope you realize just how lucky you are. Not many First Years could take on a full grown maintain troll and live to tell the tale. I award each of you five points...for sheer dumb luck.
INT. SEVENTH FLOOR CORRIDOR - MOMENTS LATER - NIGHT
Hermione walks silently beside Harry and Ron.
HARRY
Good of her to get us out of trouble like that.
RON
Mind you, we did save her from a full grown mountain troll.
HARRY
Mind you, she might not have needed saving if we hadn't locked the thing in with her.
Ron glances at Hermione, then away.
RON
What are friends for?
INT. GREAT HALL - DAY
Harry, Ron and Hermione sit together. Harry ignores his breakfast. Ron, as usual, is stuffing his face.
RON
Take a bit of toast, mate. Go on.
HERMIONE
Ron's right, Harry. You're going to need your strength today.
HARRY
I'm not hungry.
SNAPE
appearing
Good luck today, Potter. Then again, now that you've proven yourself against a troll, a little game of Quidditch should be easy work for you. Even if it is against my boys.
Snape smiles, LIMPS away toward the Slytherin table.
HERMIONE
That was...disturbing.
RON
I tell you what's disturbing. Snape smiling.
HARRY
That explains the blood...
HERMIONE
Blood?
HARRY
Last night, Ron and I saw Snape heading for the third floor. I'm guessing he let the troll in as a diversion, tried to get past the three-headed dog, and got himself bit. That's why he's limping.
HERMIONE
But why would anyone go near that dog?
HARRY
Listen. The day I was at Gringotts, Hagrid took something out of one of the vaults. Said it was Hogwarts business. Very secret.
HERMIONE
So you're saying...
HARRY
That's what the dog's guarding. That's what Snape wants.
RON
"But what's safer than Gringotts?
HARRY
One place, according to Hagrid. Hogwarts.
HERMIONE
Well, whatever it is, it must be really valuable.
HARRY
Or really dangerous.
Just then, an OWL beats into the room.
HERMIONE
Bit early for mail, isn't it?
HARRY
That's Hedwig.
All watch as she swoops down with a LONG, THIN PACKAGE. Harry slips Hedwig a piece of his uneaten toast, strips open the parcel and finds, inside, a sleek mahogany BROOMSTICK.
HARRY
It's a broomstick.
RON
That's not a broomstick, Harry. That's a Nimbus Two Thousand.
HARRY
But who...?
Harry glances up, sees—far across the room--Professor McGonagall looking his way. Quickly, she turns away.
EXT. QUIDDITCH FIELD - DAY
The stadium is full. Ron and Hermione join Neville and Seamus in the Gryffindor section, unfurl a banner that reads POTTER FOR PRESIDENT. As the Slytherin and Gryffindor teams take the field, the CROWD ROARS. Oliver Wood runs up alongside a nervous Harry, who clutches his new Nimbus 2000.
WOOD
I know what you're thinking, Harry. I'm playing my first game of Quidditch, the entire school's watching me and, worst of all, it's against Slytherin. Am I right?
HARRY
Pretty close.
WOOD
It's all right. I felt the same way before my first game.
HARRY
What happened?
WOOD
I don't really remember. I took a Bludger to the head about two minutes in and woke up in the hospital a week later.
Madame Hooch, clad in REFEREE ROBES, addresses the players.
MADAME HOOCH
Now, I want a nice clean game. From all of you.
She glances tellingly at Slytherin Captain MARCUS FLINT.
Harry leans over to ANGELINA JOHNSON, Gryffindor Chaser.
HARRY
Who's he, Angelina?
ANGELINA
Marcus Flint. Slytherin Captain. They say he's got troll blood in him.
Harry swallows as Flint glares at him murderously.
MADAME HOOCH
Mount your brooms, please.
Hands trembling, Harry waits, then the WHISTLE BLASTS. FOURTEEN BROOMSTICKS rise into the air. As the crowd ROARS, Madam Hooch kicks the crate, releasing two SCREAMING Bludgers, then tosses up the Quaffle. In the stands, LEE JORDAN does COMMENTARY.
LEE JORDAN
Quaffle's up...and straight off taken by Angelina Johnson of Gryffindor. What an excellent Chaser that girl is, and rather attractive too, I might add.
Professor McGonagall casts a disapproving glance at Jordan, then turns to watch the action below.
Cradling the Quaffle, Angelina Johnson WEAVES wickedly past a Slytherin Chaser, DUCKS UNDER a sizzling Bludger that Fred Weasley CHIPS AWAY, then DISHES OFF to a speeding Alicia Spinnet. Alicia FALLS into a FIFTEEN FOOT ROLLING DIVE, feeds the Quaffle back to Angelina...but has it INTERCEPTED by a slashing Marcus Flint. Flint FLIES FAST for the hoop, rears back...but has his shot BLOCKED by Oliver Wood. Wood bumps, the Quaffle to Chaser Katie Bell, who ROCKETS past Flint the length of the field...only to take a Bludger to the back of the head. As the Quaffle pops loose, Marcus Flint grabs it, drives with astonishing speed back the other way, then takes a Bludger himself, courtesy of George Weasley. Angelina Johnson swoops down, Snatches the spinning Quaffle and, flying like lightning, races the field to score.
As Gryffindor CHEERS fill the cold air, Hagrid makes his way up the stands, scattering students in his wake.
HAGRID
Budge up there. Clear the way. How's Harry holdin' up?
Ron and Hermione squeeze together, giving Hagrid space.
RON
He hasn't had much to do yet.
HAGRID
First game. He stays outta trouble, that'll be doin' enough.
Above the pitch, Slytherin's ADRIAN PUCEY eludes two Bludgers, two Weasleys and the Chaser, ZOOMING toward the goals...when suddenly a FLASH OF GOLD zips by his left ear.
HARRY
The Snitch!
Far below, Slytherin Seeker TERENCE HIGGS makes his move.
Harry DIVES. Faster than Higgs, he closes the gap quickly, eyes locked on the tiny golden ball. He adds some speed, reaches out, and—WHAM!—Marcus Flint HITS HIM full on, sending him reeling. Harry PULLS UP his tip, LEVELS-OFF, and glances about. But the Snitch is GONE.
RON/HERMIONE/HAGRID
FOUL! FOUL! FOUL!
As a Bludger screams past Harry, he tries to kick his broom higher. Instead, it LURCHES, nearly tossing him off. Below, Hagrid peers through his BINOCULARS, frowns.
HAGRID
Dunno what Harry thinks he's doin'. If I didn't know better, I'd say he's lost control of his broom...
RON
Maybe something happened to it when Flint blocked him.
In the stands, people gasp as the broom ROLLS OVER and leaves Harry DANGLING from one end. Neville buries his face.
HAGRID
No. Can't nothin' interfere with a broomstick except, powerful Dark magic. No kid could do that to a Nimbus 2000.
Hearing this, Hermione GRABS Hagrid's binoculars.
HERMIONE
whispering to Ron
It's Snape. He's jinxing the broom.
Ron takes the binoculars, looks. Snape sits MUTTERING in the opposite stands, staring into the sky. Staring at Harry.
RON
Jinxing the broom? What do we do?
HERMIONE
Leave it to me.
As Hermione dashes off, Ron turns the binoculars back to the sky. Harry hangs from the broom with two hands while Fred hovers nearby. George circles about ten feet below.
HARRY
What’s George doing?
FRED
Just in case you fall, George will...
not sure of this himself
...catch you.
HARRY
I knew I should have gone out for football.
GEORGE
What's football?
Hermione fights her way through the Slytherin faithful, who cackle at Harry's plight, toward Snape.
MALFOY
Take a good look, lads. With any luck we'll be having Potter soup for supper—
Just then, Hermione brushes past, sending Malfoy ass over tea kettle into Professor Quirrell in the row below. Reaching Snape, Hermione crouches down and whips out her wand.
Across the field Ron peers through the binoculars...
RON
Come on, Hermione...
Just then, BLUE FLAMES spit from Hermione's wand, climbing quickly up Snape's robes. Snape continues to mutter, staring skyward, then realizes he's on fire, and looks away. In the commotion, that ensues, Ron sees Hermione scoop the blue fire into a little jar, slip it into robe, and make her escape.
Instantly, Harry's broom stops jerking. He clambers back on, when—SWOOSH!—A FLASH OF GOLD streaks by him: the Snitch. Higgs ZOOMS UP from below and he and Harry give chase.
The Snitch SWERVES, then... DIVES. As it PLUMMETS, Harry and Higgs plummet too, giving it all they've got.
On the pitch below, Hermione puts her hand to her mouth. In the stands, Neville buries his head again.
As the Snitch drops, the ground rushes crazily upward, the speed breathtaking. Harry seems intoxicated by it, slightly crazed, eyes riveted to the fluttering Snitch, seeing it and only it. Higgs, on the other hand, sees only the ground and, at the last minute, can bear it no longer, PULLING UP on his broom and SWERVING to safety. As Harry and earth collide, the Nimbus cartwheels away, Harry rolls off and, coming up on all fours, Claps his hand to his mouth. As if he were sick.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Well, that's unfortunate. Understandable, but unfortunate.
As Harry COUGHS, Hagrid takes back his binoculars, which, unfortunately for Ron, are still around Ron's neck.
HAGRID
Unfortunate nothin'. He's got the Snitch!
Harry SHOOTS his hand in the air. The crowd ROARS. Marcus Flint touches down, fuming.
FLINT
He didn't catch it. He swallowed it!
HERMIONE
popping in
Nothing in the Quidditch rulebook discriminates against catching the Snitch in your mouth. Or any other place for that matter. In fact, in a game played in Greece in the late seventeenth century—
MADAME HOOCH
Thank you, Miss Granger. We can dispense with the more unattractive historical details of the game. Nevertheless, your point is well taken. Match to Gryffindor!
As Harry's teammates lift him to their shoulders, Hermione spies Snape in the far stands, limping quickly away, his robes still smoking.
EXT. HOGWARTS GROUNDS - LATER - DAY
Harry, Ron, and Hermione walk with Hagrid towards his home, a WOODEN HUT on the edge of the Dark Forest.
HAGRID
Rubbish! Why would Snape put a curse on Harry's broom?
HARRY
Who knows? Why was he trying to get past that three-headed dog on Halloween?
HAGRID
How do you know about Fluffy?
RON
Fluffy?
HERMIONE
That thing has a name?
HAGRID
'Course he's got a name. He's mine. Bought him off an Irish bloke I met in the Pub las' year. Lent him to Dumbledore to guard the...
HARRY
Yes?
HAGRID
Don' be askin' me anymore. That's top secret, that is.
HARRY
But Hagrid, whatever Fluffy's guarding, Snape's trying to steal it.
HAGRID
Codswallop! Snape's a Hogwart's teacher.
HERMIONE
Hogwarts teacher or not, I know a jinx when I see one, Hagrid. I've read all about them. You've got to keep eye contact, and Snape wasn't blinking.
HAGRID
Now listen to me, all three of yeh—yer meddlin' in things that shouldn't be meddled. It's dangerous. What that dog's guardin' is strictly betw'n Professor Dumbledore and Nicolas Flamel—
Hagrid stops, furious with himself, then turns for his hut, where FANG, an enormous black boarhound, greets him.
HARRY
Nicolas Flamel. Why does that name sound familiar?
EXT. HOGWARTS CASTLE - DAY
December.. Snow falls, dusting the castle turrets and blanketing the grounds. Hagrid drags a GIANT CHRISTMAS FIR toward the Castle, Fang trotting by his side.
INT. GREAT HALL - DAY
Nearly Headless Nick SWOOPS about a TOWERING CHRISTMAS TREE, running GARLAND over the limbs, while Peeves plucks ORNAMENTS from the branches, hurling them to the floor.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Listen up! As the lake is frozen, all students going home for holiday will take a flying sleigh to the departure platform. Earmuffs are strongly recommended.
Harry and Ron pay no attention to the students bustling about them, sitting alone by the window playing WIZARD CHESS. Unlike Muggle chess, these figures are alive. Presently, Harry's BISHOP looks cross.
BISHOP
Don't send me there! Can't you see his Knight? Send him. We can afford to lose him.
The bishop points to a PAWN. Harry sheepishly complies.
RON
Queen to pawn six.
Ron YAWNS as his queen steps forward and--with extreme prejudice—disposes of the pawn. Hermione, huge trunk in tow, arrives just in time to witness the carnage.
HERMIONE
Oh my god! That's barbaric!
RON
That's chess. I see you're packed.
HERMIONE
I see you're not.
RON
Change of plans. My parents decided to go to Romania to visit my brother Charlie. He's studying dragons there.
HERMIONE
You can help Harry then. He promised to keep looking in the library for Nicolas Flamel over holiday.
RON
We have looked. A hundred times.
HERMIONE
as she exits
Not in the Restricted Section.
RON
I think we've had a bad influence on her.
INT. BOYS TOWER DORMITORY - MORNING
CAMERA PANS a stack of PACKAGES at the foot of Harry's bed.
RON
Happy Christmas, Harry!
Harry rubs his eyes, sees Ron wearing a MAROON SWEATER over his pajamas. Ron tosses him a present.
HARRY
I've got presents.
RON
What'd you expect? In your hand's from Hagrid. And by the looks of that lumpy one, Mum's sent you a Weasley sweater.
Harry opens Hagrid's, finds a WOODEN FLUTE. As he blows it, Hedwig cocks her head. It sounds like an owl. Harry takes up the next parcel. It's very light. He reads the NOTE attached.
HARRY
'Your father left this in my possession before he died. It is time it was returned to you.'
Harry tears the paper away, finds something SHINY and translucent slithers to the floor.
HARRY
It's some kind of...cloak.
RON
Well, let's see then. Put it on.
As Harry takes the cloth, we hang on Ron, watching, then:
RON
Ahhh!
Harry's head is floating in midair. Ron looks on in awe.
RON
Harry, do you know what this is? It’s an invisibility cloak. They're really rare. Who gave you this?
HARRY
There's no name...It just says, 'Use it well.'
INT. LIBRARY - NIGHT
Pitch black. A match STRIKES, floats by itself, in midair. It drifts forward, LIGHTS a LAMP.
INT. LIBRARY - ROW OF BOOKS - MOMENTS LATER - NIGHT
The lamp floats eerily among the books, then rises, illuminates a SIGN: RESTRICTED.
INT. RESTRICTED ROOM - LIBRARY - NIGHT
The lamp FLOATS into the room, the invisibility cloak drops and, bit by bit, HARRY appears.
HARRY
Flamel. Nicolas Flamel...
Harry runs his finger along the spines, stops. Takes a LARGE BOOK from the shelf. Runs his hand over the course leather, then...opens it. At once it begins to SHRIEK! Harry SLAMS it shut, but it goes on WAILING. Stumbling back, Harry tips the lamp and all GOES dark. FOOTSTEPS ring out. Frantically, Harry sifts the darkness for the cloak, panicking, when his hands...DISAPPEAR. Pitching the cloak over himself, he dashes to the door, just as it CLANGS open—revealing Filch. As Filch's pale, wide eyes stare straight ahead, Harry glides right past him...
INT. LIBRARY CORRIDOR - NIGHT
—then dashes into the corridor, the book’s SHRIEKS echoing behind him, coming face to face with... Snape and Quirrel, in the midst of a heated conversation.
SNAPE
Have you found out how to get past that beast of Hagrid’s, yet?
QUIRRELL
B-b-but Severus, I—
SNAPE
You don’t want me as your enemy, Quirrel.
QUIRRELL
I don’t know what you—
SNAPE
You know perfectly well what I mean. Your little bit of hocus pocus...
Harry walks slowly, carefully around them, trying not to be heard. Snape stops, as if he's felt a small breeze, then... turns... seeing soft FEATHERS OF VAPOUR. Snape reaches out to touch them... Inside the cloak, Harry puts his hand to his mouth, to stop his breath... Snape finds nothing in front of him. He turns back to Quirrel.
SNAPE
We'll have another little chat soon, when you've had time to think things over and decide where your loyalties lie.
The door behind them slowly opens and closes... quietly, carefully...
Filch appears, from around the corridor, walks up to Snape and Quirrel.
FILCH
Professors... I found this. In the Restricted Section. It's still hot.
SNAPE
Then they can't be far.
Snape, Quirrel and Filch exit.
INT. EMPTY CLASSROOM - NIGHT
Harry drops the cloak, exhales, and absently rubs his scar; wincing mildly. As his eyes adjust, he sees a MAGNIFICENT MIRROR, as high as the ceiling, across the room. On the frame is an INSCRIPTION: Erised stra ehru oyt ube cafru oyt on wohsi. He steps in front.
HARRY
Ah!
Harry turns—as if expecting to see someone--but finds only the dark shapes of desks and chairs.. Slowly, he turns back.
In the mirror, Harry sees his own startled reflection and...beyond...a MAN and a WOMAN.
HARRY
Mum? Dad?
INT. BOYS TOWER DORMITORY - MOMENTS LATER - NIGHT
CLOSE UP: A SLEEPING RON
HARRY
Ron! Ron! Wake up!
Ron squints in confusion, then Harry lowers the cloak.
HARRY
There's something you've got to see!
INT. EMPTY CLASSROOM - A FEW MINUTES LATER - NIGHT
Harry drags Ron to the mirror.
HARRY
Come look! It's my family.
RON
yawning
That's you, Harry.
HARRY
Look in properly, go on, stand here.
Harry steps aside. Ron takes his place and...freezes.
HARRY
There. You see them, don't you? That's—
RON
Me. Only I'm...Head Boy! And I'm holding the Quidditch Cup and...bloody hell...I'm Quidditch Captain too! Harry, do you think this mirror shows the future?
HARRY
troubled
How can it? All my family are dead.
INT. GREAT HALL - THE NEXT MORNING - DAY
The Hall looks deserted as the students who remain eat breakfast. The Weasleys chatter amongst themselves, laughing, then Ron looks away, sees Harry staring into the distance.
RON
Want to play chess?
HARRY
No.
RON
Want to go visit Hagrid?
HARRY
No.
RON
Harry, I know what you're thinking. But don't. There's something not right about that mirror.
INT. EMPTY CLASSROOM - NIGHT
Harry sits before the mirror, transfixed.
DUMBLEDORE (O.S.)
Back again, Harry?
Harry turns. Dumbledore slips off a desk, sits beside him.
DUMBLEDORE
I see that you—like so many before you—have discovered the delights of the Mirror of Erised. I expect by now you realize what it does.
HARRY
It shows me my family.
DUMBLEDORE
And it showed your friend Ron himself as Head Boy.
Harry looks surprised. Dumbledore smiles.
DUMBLEDORE
I don't need a cloak to become invisible.
re: the mirror
I'll give you a clue, Harry. The happiest man on earth would look into the Mirror of Erised and see only himself, exactly as he is.
HARRY
So, then, it shows us what we want... Whatever we want...
DUMBLEDORE
Yes and no. It shows us nothing more or less than the deepest, most desperate desire of our hearts. You, who have never known your family, see them gathered around you. Ronald Weasley, who has always been overshadowed by his family, sees himself standing alone. Remember this, though, Harry. This mirror gives us neither knowledge or truth. Men have wasted away before it. Even gone mad.
rising
That's why it will be moved to a new home tomorrow. I ask that you do not go looking for it again, Harry. It does not do to dwell on dreams and forget to live.
HARRY
Can I ask you something, Professor? What do you see when you look in the Mirror?
DUMBLEDORE
I? I see myself holding a pair of thick, woolen socks. One can never have enough socks, Harry. You'll do well to remember that as well.
EXT. SCHOOLCOURTYARD - DAY
Bundled against thechill,Harry—burdened by heavy thoughts— enters the empty courtyard, Hedwig on his arm. As he releases her, she sails high over the castle walls...wending her way through the turrets and then out over the wintry grounds, her reflection glimmering on the surface of the icy lake below.
As she turns, beating her way back, the dark sky lightens, turning a slow, glorious blue and the once-dark trees shimmerin the crisp Spring light. Hogwarts itself shimmers as well, no longer dusted with snow. Hedwig glides over the castle walls, swoops, and comes to a fluttering rest outside one of the high windows of the Great Hall.
INT. GREAT HALL - DAY
Hermione—book in hand—quizzes Ron, who seems more interested in the pack of Chocolate Frogs in his hand.
HERMIONE
I'll ask you again. What are the three most Crucial ingredients in a Forgetfulness Potion?
RON
And I'll tell you again. I forgot.
HERMIONE
And what, may I ask, do you plan to do should you get that question on final exams?
RON
Crib off you.
HERMIONE
You will not. Besides, according to Professor McGonagall, we're to be given special quills bewitched with an anti­ cheating spell.
RON
That's insulting. It's as if they don't trust us.
frowning
Dumbledore again.
As Ron tosses the wizard card onto the table, HARRY WATCHES IT SPIN...just.as...a smattering of LAUGHTER erupts across the hall. Neville is HOPPING like a bunny, legs STUCK TOGETHER, while Seamus trails after.
RON/HERMIONE
Leg-Locker Curse.
and then to each other
Malfoy.
Neville, breathing hard, reaches the Gryffindor table, then, before anyone can catch him, topples to the floor.
RON
You’ve got to start standing up to him, Neville.
NEVILLE
How? I can't stand up at all.
SEAMUS
I offered to do the countercurse, but he wouldn't let me.
NEVILLE
Of course not. That's all I need, you to set my bloody kneecaps on fire.
SEAMUS
I don't appreciate the insinuation, Longbottom. Besides, if anyone cares to notice, my eyebrows have completely grown back.
As Seamus turns away, the others see a curious BALD SPOT on the back of his head. Ron takes out his wand.
RON
All right then, Neville, who shall it be? Me, Hermione, or...
HARRY
I've found him.
Ron stops, sees Harry holding up Dumbledore's wizard card. Ron takes it.
RON
He's bowling. So what? He's always bowling.
Harry rolls his eyes, turns the card over for Ron to READ.
RON
'Dumbledore is particularly famous for his defeat of the dark wizard Grindelwald, for the discovery of the twelve uses of dragon's blood...and his work on alchemy...with his partner, Nicolas Flamel.'
HARRY
I knew the name sounded familiar. I read it on the train that day.
Hermione steps right over Neville.
HERMIONE
Follow me.
NEVILLE
Hey! Wait! What about that counter-curse!
Neville1 eyes shift. Seamus smiles, raises an eyebrow.
INT. LIBRARY - MOMENTS LATER - DAY
CLOSE UP: A BOOK ON ALCHEMY
as it hits the table with a LOUD THUD. Hermione flips through the pages as Harry and Ron look over her shoulder.
HERMIONE
How could I be so stupid! I checked this out weeks ago for a bit of light reading.
RON
This is light?
HERMIONE
Of course! Here it is!
whispers dramatically
Nicolas Flamel is the only known maker of the Sorcerer's Stone!
Harry and Ron glance at each other, then Hermione.
HARRY/RON
The what?
HERMIONE
Oh, honestly, don't you two read?
reading
’The Sorcerer's Stone is a legendary substance with astonishing powers. It will transform any metal into pure gold and produces the Elixir of Life, which will make the drinker immortal.'
RON
Immortal.
HERMIONE
It means you'll never die.
RON
I know what it means—
HERMIONE
’The only stone currently in existence belongs to Mr. Nicolas Flamel, the noted alchemist, who last year celebrated his six hundred and sixty-fifth birthday.'
looking up
That's what Fluffy's guarding on the Third Floor. That's what's under the trapdoor. The Sorcerer's Stone!
HARRY
So Flamel knows someone's after the Stone...gives it to Dumbledore to keep safe at Hogwarts...not realizing that the one who's after it...
HERMIONE
Teaches at Hogwarts.
RON
So Snape wants piles of gold and to live forever. Who wouldn't?
Hermione closes the book, troubled by something.
HARRY
What is it, Hermione?
HERMIONE
I don't want to scare you, Harry. It's just...if all Snape wants is the Sorcerer's Stone...why did he try to kill you that day on the Quidditch pitch?
Harry ponders this, but doesn't have an answer.
EXT. HAGRID'S HUT - LATER - NIGHT
Harry, trailed by Ron and Hermione, KNOCKS on Hagrid's door.
The door rattles, opens a crack, and Hagrid peers out.
HAGRID
Oh. Hullo. Er...not ter be rude, but I'm not really fit ter entertain right about--
HARRY
We know about the Sorcerer's Stone.
INT. HAGRID'S HUT - NIGHT
Everything here is oversized. Hagrid adds wood to an already roaring fire, putters about a large, simmering kettle.
HAGRID
Snape! Blimey, yer not still on abou' him, are yeh?
HARRY
Hagrid, we know he's after the Stone. We just don't know...why.
HAGRID
Harry, Snape was one o' the teachers in on protectin' the Stone. He's not abou' ter steal it.
HARRY
What?
HAGRID
Yeh heard me: Snape was one o' the teachers in on protectin' the Stone. Now, as I said, I'm a bit preoccupied at the moment--
HARRY
Wait a minute. One of the teachers?
HERMIONE
Of course! There are other things defending the Stone, aren't there? Spells, enchantments...
HAGRID
Tha's right. Bloody waste o' time if yeh ask me. T'ain't no one goin' ter get past Fluffy. Not a soul knows how 'cept me an' Dumbledore—
CRACK! A CLICKING SOUND is heard coming from the kettle, then a curious SCRAPING. Harry looks. Sees a HUGE BLACK EGG.
HARRY
Hagrid...exactly what is that?
HAGRID
Ah. Well. That's...er...
RON
I know what that is! But Hagrid. How did you ever get one?
HAGRID
Won it. Off a stranger in the village. Think he was glad ter be rid of it, ter be honest.Blimey...
The scraping is furious now. Quickly, Hagrid takes the egg from the kettle, sets it on a table. Fissures spread like veins over its surface, then it...EXPLODES... SHELL FLYING LIKE SHRAPNEL. Harry, Ron and Hermione cover themselves.
HERMIONE
Is that...a dragon?
RON
That's not just a dragon! That's a Norwegian Ridgeback! My brother Charlie works with these in Romania.
HAGRID
Isn't he beautiful! Bless 'im, look, he knows 'is Mummy!
tickling the dragon's tummy
Hullo, Norbert.
HARRY
Norbert?
HAGRID
Well, he's got ter have a name.
The dragon blinks at Hagrid, screws up its face and...SNEEZES, spewing forth a shower of SPARKS, which sends Fang whimpering and kindles a brief blaze in Hagrid's beard.
HAGRID
Needs ter be trained up a bit, o' Course,
stopping cold
Hey, you there!
All turn. Peering through the window is a FACE.
HARRY
Malfoy!
They leap to the door--see a fleet figure racing across the grounds, disappearing in the night.
EXT. HOGWARTS GROUNDS - MOMENTS LATER - NIGHT
Harry, Ron and Hermione walk toward the glittering castle.
HARRY
Hagrid always wanted a dragon. Told me so the first time I ever met him.
RON
But it's crazy. And worse, Malfoy, knows.
HARRY
I don't understand. Is that bad?
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL (O.S.)
Mr. Potter. Mr. Weasley. Miss Granger.
Up ahead stands Professor McGonagall, a jagged silhouette in castle-light. Beside her, Draco Malfoy grins arrogantly.
RON
It's bad.
INT. PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL'S CLASSROOM - MOMENTS LATER
Harry, Ron and Hermione stand before a displeased McGonagall, while Malfoy looks on, practically quivering with pleasure.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
As every schoolchild knows, dragon­ breeding is against our laws, has been ever since the Warlock's Convention of 1709. And for good reason. It's hard to keep the Muggles from noticing us if we've got a thirty-foot Ukranian Ironbelly running around the back garden.
RON
Norwegian Ridgeback.
Professor Mcgonagall's eyes shift, narrow on Ron.
RON
I just meant... in this case...sorry.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Personally, I don’t care if Hagrid has a Chinese Fireball sitting in his kitchen, Mr. Weasley. He answers to Dumbledore. You, on the other hand, answer to me. Nothing —I repeat, nothing--gives a student the right to walk about the school at night. Therefore, as punishment for your actions, fifty points will be taken.
As the others gasp, Malfoy's eyes glimmer with cruel ecstasy.
HARRY
Fifty?
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Each. And to insure it doesn't happen again, all four of you will receive detention.
MALFOY
Excuse me, Professor. Perhaps I heard you wrong. I thought you said the four of us.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Indeed. You see, Mr. Malfoy, however noble your intentions, you too were out of bed after hours. You will join your classmates in detention.
INT. GREAT HALL - MORNING
As Harry, Ron and Hermione eat breakfast, the HOURGLASSES tell the tale: Gryffindor has slipped to last place. Just then, Fred and George pass by.
FRED
Don't worry, you three. This'll all blow over.
GEORGE
It may take a year or two, but eventually people will start talking to you again.
HERMIONE
sniffing defensively
Well, I for one, see nothing wrong with a reduced social life. It'll give us more time to revise for finals.
RON
Why bother? Even with Malfoy losing points, Slytherin's a lock for the House Cup. And look. Malfoy knows it.
All three peer at Malfoy. He raises a goblet in their direction, cackles with Crabbe and Goyle.
HERMIONE
He won't be smiling tonight,
off Harry and Ron's looks
Haven't you heard? For detention they're taking us into the Dark Forest.
EXT. HOGWARTS GROUNDS - NIGHT
Beneath a pale moon, Filch, carrying a lantern, leads Harry, Ron, Hermione and Malfoy across the dark grounds.
FILCH
A pity they let the old punishments die. Was a time, detention would find you all hanging by your thumbs in the dungeons...
EXT. HAGRID'S HUT -MOMENTS LATER
As Filch and the others reach the yard, they find Hagrid stringing a crossbow, Fang at his side.
FILCH
A sorry lot this, Hagrid. I pity you.
Filch squints, sees tears running down Hagrid's face.
FILCH
Good god, man, you're not still on about that bloody dragon, are you?
HAGRID
to Harry, Ron, Hermione
Norbert's gone. Dumbledore's sent 'im off ter Romania ter live in a colony.
HERMIONE
Well, that's good, isn't it? He'll be with his own kind. Better all around, don't you think? Especially for Fang.
Hearing his name, a singed Fang beats his BANDAGED tail.
HAGRID
But what if Norbert doesn't like Romania. What if the other dragons are mean to him? He's only a baby, after all.
RON
A baby that breaths fire.
Harry elbows Ron, silencing him.
FILCH
For god's sake, pull yourself together, man. You're going into the Forest, after all. Got to have your wits about you.
MALFOY
The Forest? But I thought that was just a joke. We can't go in the Forest. Students aren't allowed. And there's...werewolves.
FILCH
turning away
Oh, there's more'n werewolves in those trees, lad. You can be sure o' that.
EXT. DARK FOREST - LATER
Harry and the others trail Hagrid down a skinny path through the dark trees. Hagrid turns to Harry, speaks low.
HAGRID
Sorry abou’ this, Harry. Know it’s me that deserves punishin’, not you. By all rights I should be sittin’ in a cell in Azkaban tonight.
HARRY
It’s all right, Hagrid. Besides, it’s not your fault we were out after hours. If we hadn’t come knocking on your door in the middle of the night—
Abruptly Hagrid kneels, takes something onto his fingers.
HARRY
a bit warily
What’s that?
HAGRID
The reason we’re here.
rising
All righ’ now, lis’en up. See this here?
Hagrid holds up his fingers. They're marked with SILVER.
HAGRID
It's unicorn blood. I found one dead a few weeks back and two before that first term. This one here's been hurt bad by summat. It's our job to find the poor thing. Only one way ter get that done and that's ter split inter two parties. Ron, Hermione—yeh'll come with me. Harry, yeh'll go with Malfoy.
MALFOY
I want Fang then.
HAGRID
Fine. But jus', so yeh know. He's a bloody coward.
EXT. PATH - DARK FOREST
Fang trots down the path ahead of Harry, while a nervous Malfoy trails behind.
MALFOY
Wait until my father hears about this. This is servant stuff. We should be writing lines or...something.
HARRY
If I didn't know better, Draco, I'd say you were scared.
MALFOY
You're too stupid to be scared, Potter, growing up with Muggles. If you were from a real wizard family, you wouldn't be laughing.
HARRY
I'm not, believe me...
As Malfoy joins Harry, he stops dead. The trees ahead are striped violently with DRIPPING SILVER, and beyond—lying in a small clearing—is the broken body of a UNICORN.
Fang backs off, something primal in his eyes. Harry watches Mm, reading hisfear, then..the SLITHERING SOUND returns. Seconds later, a HOODED FIGURE slithers over the leaves, drops its head over the leering WOUND on the unicorn's side...and begins to DRINK ITS BLOOD.
MALFOY
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAH!
Malfoy bolts, slipping and sliding as Fang whimpers after. Barry WINCES, clutches his scar, then sees that the Hooded Figure is staring directly at. him, silver dribbling down its front. Woozy from pain, Harry staggers back, then falls, the SLITHERING SOUND DRAWING CLOSER, when...
HOOVES pummel the path behind him and some thing leaps clear over him, flickering past the moon above. It charges the hooded figure, drives it back into the trees...and away.
A SHADOW FALLS across Harry's face. It is a CENTAUR with eyes like pale saphires. He is FIRENZE.
FIRENZE
Harry Potter. You are known to many creatures here. You must leave. The forest is not safe at this time. Especially for you.
HARRY
What was that thing you saved me from?
FIRENZE
Only one who has nothing to lose would commit such a crime. It is a monstrous thing to slay a unicorn. The blood of a unicorn will keep you alive, even if you are an inch from death, but at a terrible price. You have slain something so pure that-- from the moment the blood touches your lips-you will have a half life. A cursed life.
HARRY
But who would choose such a life?
FIRENZE
Can you think of no one?
HARRY
Do you mean to say that thing that killed the unicorn, that was drinking its blood, that was Voldemort!
FIRENZE
Do you know whatis hidden in the school at this very moment, Mr. Potter?
HARRY
The Sorcerer’s Stone.
AND FOR THE UK AUDIENCE...
HARRY
The Philosopher’s Stone...
A commotion is heard as Hagrid and the others come slashing through the trees. As Harry reacts, the others break into the clearing.
HERMIONE
Harry!
HAGRID
Oh, it’s you, is it, Firenze. I see you’ve met our Mr. Potter. All right there, Harry?
Harry nods...but he looks anything but all right.
INT. GRYFFINDOR COMMON ROOM - LATER
Harry paces before the fire while Ron and Hermione watch.
RON
You mean...You-Know-Who's out there, right now, in the forest!
HARRY
But he's weak. He's living off the unicorns. Don't you see? We had it wrong. Snape doesn't want the Stone for himself. He wants the Stone for Voldemort. With the Elixer of Life Voldemort will be strong again. He'll...come back.
RON
But if he comes back, you don't think he'd try to...kill you? Do you?
HARRY
I think if he'd had the chance, he might have tried to kill me tonight.
Ron looks vaguely sick.
RON
And to think I've been worrying about my Potions final.
HERMIONE
No. We're forgetting one thing. Who's the one wizard Voldemort always feared?
as they turn
Dumbledore. As long as Dumbledore's around, you're safe, Harry. As long as Dumbledore's around...you can't be touched.
EXT. HOGWARTS CASTLE - DAY
Students flock onto the sunny grounds, finished with exams.
HERMIONE
I'd always heard Hogwarts' end of year exams were frightful. But I found that rather enjoyable. Weren’t you stunned not to be asked about Elfric the Eager?
RON
I'm stunned my head didn't explode. Alright there, Harry?
HARRY
My scar. Keeps...burning.
HERMIONE
It's happened before...
HARRY
Not like this...
Harry glances across the grounds at Hagrid, sitting in his front garden playing a FLUTE. At his feet, Fang's eyes droop.
HARRY
No...
HERMIONE
Harry?
Harry starts across the grounds. Hermione and Ron glance at one another, rush after.
HARRY
Don't you think it's a bit odd, that what Hagrid wants more than anything is a dragon? And a stranger turns up who just happens to have one? I mean, how many people wander around with dragon eggs in their pocket? Why didn't I see it before?
INT. HAGRID'S HUT - MOMENTS LATER
Hagrid shrugs, goes on polishing the FLUTE in his hand.
HAGRID
Ne'er saw his face. Kept his hood up.
HARRY
Didn't that strike you as unusual?
HAGRID
Yeh meet a lot o' unusual types in the village. Ain't 'xactly usual meself.
HARRY
This stranger, though. You and he must've talked...
HAGRID
He asked what I did, the sorta creatures I look after. Tol' him after Fluffy a dragon wouldbe easy.
HARRY
And did he seem interested in Fluffy?
HAGRID
Well, yeah. How many three-headed dogs do yeh meet, even if yeh're in the trade? So I tells 'im, this stranger, the trick with any beast is ter know what calms 'em. Take Fluffy, fer example. Jus' play 'im a bit o' music an' he'll go straight off ter sleep--
Hagrid stops, horrified by his slip.
HAGRID
I shouldn'ta tol' yeh that! Forget I said it! Hey! Where yeh goin'! Hey!
INT. MCGONAGALL'S CLASSROOM - DAY
Harry, Ron and Hermione clang through the door, Professor McGonagall looks up.
HARRY
We have to see Professor Dumbledore. Immediately.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
I see. Well, I'm afraid Professor Dumbledore is not here. Only moments ago, he received an urgent owl from the Ministry of Magic and flew off to London.
HARRY
He's gone? Now? But this is important! This is about...the Sorcerer's Stone.
Professor McGonagall nearly drops the books in her hands.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
How do you know--
HARRY
Someone's going to try and steal it.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Nonsense. I don't know how you three found out about the Stone, but I assure you it is well protected. Now, run along.
EXT. CORRIDOR - MOMENTS LATER
Harry leads the others down the corridor.
HARRY
That was no stranger Hagrid met in the village. It was Snape. Which means he knows how to get past Fluffy.
HERMIONE
And with Dumbledore gone...
SNAPE (O.S.)
Good afternoon.
They freeze. Up ahead, Snape stands, studying them.
SNAPE
Now what would three fine Gryffindors such as yourselves be doing inside on such a lovely day?
HERMIONE
We were just...
SNAPE
You want to be careful. People will think you're...up to something.
Snape eyes Harry, then turns away.
HERMIONE
What do we do now?
HARRY
Go through the trapdoor. Tonight.
INT. GRYFFINDOR COMMON ROOM - NIGHT
Empty. Dark. Two doors ease open. Hermione slips out the one, Harry and Ron the other. They creep toward the Pink Lady when--CROAK!--they freeze. Look. Breath a sigh of relief.
HARRY/RON/HERMIONE
Trevor.
Trevor the toad blinks up at them. CROAK!
RON
Trevor! Shh! Go! You shouldn't be here.
NEVILLE
Neither should you.
They all jump. Neville rises from an armchair.
NEVILLE
You're sneaking out again, aren't you?
HARRY
Now, Neville, listen...
NEVILLE
No! I won't let you. You'll get Gryffindor in trouble again. I'll...I'll fight you! You were the ones who told me I had to stand up to people!
RON
To people. Not us.
Neville raises his fists. Unfortunately, his teddy bear pyjamas somewhat undermine the intended effect.
HERMIONE
Neville. I'm really, really sorry about this.
raising her wand
Petrificus Totalus!
Instantly, Neville's arms and legs snap to his sides. He SWAYS...then FALLS FLAT...only his eyes moving, staring at them in horror. Harry and Ron look a little horrified too.
RON
You're a little scary sometimes, you know that? Brilliant. But scary.
INT. THIRD FLOOR CORRIDOR - MOMENTS LATER - NIGHT
CAMERA DRIFTS...down the corridor. Suddenly, up ahead, Peeves rounds the corner, MUMBLING to himself as he JUGGLES a trio of APPLES. Suddenly, he stops, eyes narrowing suspiciously.
PEEVES
Who's there? Know you're there, even if I can't see you. Are you ghoulie or ghostie or wee student beastie?
Nothing. Peeves smiles slyly, reaches back, and hurls one of the apples. It streaks through the air...then...disappears in mid-flight. Peeves smile fades.
PEEVES
Never mind.
He backpedals frantically, turns, and swoops off the way he came. Seconds later, Harry drops the cloak, tosses the APPLE in his hand to Ron.
HERMIONE
That was close.
Harry steps to the chamber before them. Inside, the thrum of MUSIC can be heard. Slowly, Harry starts to ease open the door...when... CRUNCH! Hermione and Harry jump, turn. Ron stands chewing the apple.
RON
Sorry. I get hungry when I'm nervous.
Harry pushes the door clear...finds...a giant quivering nose and yellow fangs dripping with saliva. They GASP, then...
RON
Wait a minute. He's...
HARRY
Snoring.
Harry pushes the door further and the light from the corridor falls on a TINY HARP. Playing by itself.
INT. FORBIDDEN CORRIDOR - NIGHT
As they enter, Harry takes a FLUTE from his pocket.
HARRY
Suppose we won't be needing this now. Look, it's obvious Snape's already got past Fluffy. If you two want to go back—
RON
Don't be stupid.
HERMIONE
We're coming.
HARRY
Right then. All together now.
Straining mightily, they put their shoulders to the massive paw that lays across the trapdoor. Once done, Harry flings it open. Below lies only darkness...a faint whistling wind.
HARRY
I'll go first. Don't follow until I give you a sign. If something...bad happens...get yourselves out—
stopping
Does it seem a bit...quiet...to you?
HERMIONE
The harp...what happened to the—
Splat! Something wet and sticky hits Ron's shoulder.
RON
Yuck! What's this ruddy stuff—
Slowly, they look up. A MONSTROUS, DROOLING SHADOW darkens their faces. Fluffy. Awake. Hungry. Each head ponders its own particular snack, then, with a mighty GROWL, swoops.
Instantly, the trio pitches themselves into the darkness...
INT. SHAFT/DEVIL'S SNARE - SECONDS LATER
Harry PLUMMETS down a glittering shaft, tumbling head over heels, down, down, down, until...
FLUMP! He lands in something soft and yamlike, followed quickly by Ron and Hermione. Harry adjusts his glasses, looks up. A tiny SQUARE OF LIGHT—the trapdoor—glimmers far above.
RON
That was...cool.
HARRY
We must be miles under the school.
RON
Lucky this plant thing's here, really.
HARRY
WO!
A vine snakes out Ron's back collar.
RON
Wo!
Twin creepers encircle Harry's chest.
HERMIONE
Stop moving! Both of you! This is Devil's Snare! You have to relax.
HARRY
Uh, Hermione, it's a bit difficult to relax...
as a vine encircles his neck
...given the circumstances.
HERMIONE
I know, Harry. But you must. If you don't, it'll only kill you faster.
RON
Kill us faster? Oh now I can relax.
As they watch, Hermione takes a LONG, SLOW BREATH and...is SUCKED beneath the surface...VANISHING.
HARRY/RON
Hermione!
Panicking, Harry and Ron begin to struggle anew, but the vines only wrap more tightly around them.
RON
What are we going to do now!
HERMIONE (O.S.)
Just relax.
HARRY
glancing about
Hermione? But how...where?
HERMIONE (O.S.)
Do what I say!
Harry looks at Ron. He's almost completely entwined.
HARRY
I suggest we do what she says.
Harry takes a DEEP BREATH and closes his eyes. Slowly, like witch's fingers...the vines DRAW him beneath the surface.
INT. STAIRCASE (BENEATH DEVIL'S SNARE)
Harry drops through the ceiling, twisting through the webby undergrowth of Devil's Share and onto the ground next to Hermione. From above, Ron can be HEARD screaming for HELP.
HERMIONE
He's not relaxing, is he?
Ron's VOICE BELLOWS again.
HARRY
Apparently not.
Hermione furrows her brow, thinking ALOUD in a sing-song.
HERMIONE
Devil's Snare, Devil's Snare. Dances in the dark, delights in the damp...
INT. SHAFT/DEVIL'S SNARE
Ron, wrapped tight as a mummy by this point, cocks his ear in disbelief.
RON
Is she doing a poem? It's not possible she's doing a poem, is it?
INT. STAIRCASE (BENEATH DEVIL'S SNARE)
Hermione ignores him, continuing in deep concentration.
HERMIONE
It's deadly fun, but will...sulk in the sunl That's it! Light! Devil's Snare hates the light!
She whips out her wand, points it at the vines hanging from the ceiling, and sends forth a BRIGHT BURST of GOLD.
INT. SHAFT/DEVIL'S SNARE
As the LIGHT BURNS through, the plant withers. An OPENING forms, the vines SNAP free of Ron, and...he DROPS through.
INT. STAIRCASE (BENEATH DEVIL'S SNARE)
Ron lands heavily, looks up.
RON
Lucky we didn't panic.
HARRY
Lucky Hermione pays attention in Herbology.
Just then...they detect a SOUND: a RUSTLING, a CLINKING. The three exchange a glance, begin to descend the staircase.
HERMIONE
What is that?
HARRY
I don't know...sounds like wings.
INT. CHAMBER OF KEYS
Harry, Hermione and Ron enter a brilliantly lit chamber where hundreds of JEWEL BRIGHT BIRDS flutter below a high arching ceiling. On the opposite side is a HEAVY WOODEN DOOR and, floating in the center of the chamber, a single BROOMSTICK.
Ron and Hermione begin to cross to the door, gazing in wonder at the strangely beautiful creatures overhead.
HERMIONE
Curious. I've never seen birds like these...
HARRY
They're not birds...
Ron and Hermione turn, see Harry standing by the floating broom in the center of the room, looking up.
HARRY
They're keys. And I'll bet one of them fits that door.
Hermione tests the doorknob, nods.
HERMIONE
Locked.
RON
Alohomora!
Hermione turns, sees Ron waving his wand at the knob. No good. It's still locked. He shrugs.
RON
Well, it was worth a try.
HERMIONE
peering up
Sowhat do we do? There must be a thousand keys up there...
RON
examining the lock
We're looking for a big, old-fashioned one—probably silver, like the handle. There! That one, see! With the bright blue wings!
Ron points. Fluttering within a pocket of brass keys is a larger, SILVER one.
HERMIONE
What's wrong with its wing?
RON.
The feather's pinched. Probably from Snape catching it before us.
Hermione nods, sees Harry still staring at the broom.
HERMIONE
Harry?
HARRY
It's...too simple.
RON
Oh, go on, Harry. If Snape could catch it on that old CleanSweep, you can. It's not for nothing you're the youngest Seeker in a Century.
Harry nods uncertainly—still troubled—but slowly reaches out nonetheless. As his fingers touch the broomstick...
...the KEYS EXPLODE IN A FRENZY, hissing like wasps, swarming in great, glittering clouds. Ron's smile droops.
RON
Well, this complicates things a bit.
As Harry kicks into the air, a seething cluster of keys falls like HARD RAIN, CHATTERING at his arms and legs, SLICING at his skin, SHREDDING his sweater...
RON
He'll be torn to pieces..
Horrified, Ron and Hermione watch Harry soar higher, fending off the keys with his free hand, until...
HARRY'S POV
Through a MAD CLATTERING, CLUSTER of KEYS, he spies the larger, silver one, fluttering only feet beyond his grasp.
Harry hovers, grimacing as the hissing keys drop like DARTS onto his extended hand...then SNATCHES the silver key.
Instantly, Harry whips downward in a wide, dizzying circle, trying to outrun the now furious keys. They shadow his every move, drawing closer and closer, HUMMING VICIOUSLY as they begin to CHIP at the TAIL TWIGS of the broom. Desperate, Harry throws the broom into a reckless dive and, steering with one hand...
...FLINGS the key to Ron. As Ron dashes to the door, Harry soars back up, taking the raging keys with him, then circles back and watches Ron JAM the key into the lock. As Hermione and Ron scurry through, Harry rockets straight after, the keys gaining once again, CHIPPING at the tail of broom like a buzzsaw through balsa wood. As the broom begins to WAFFLE, Harry gives one last BURST of SPEED and...SOARS through the open door. Together, Hermione and Ron FLING the door SHUT... just before the keys rain down like BULLETS.
INT. CHESS ROOM
...UTTER DARKNESS. Hermione's VOICE pierces the darkness.
HERMIONE
I don't like this. I don't like this at all.
A small bouquet of BLUE FLAMES blooms in Hermione's hands, illuminating little more than the trio's faces and some VAGUE SHAPES looming ahead.
HARRY
Where are we? A graveyard?
Harry steps forward and—suddenly--one of the SHAPES moves towards them. Hermione GASPS. The SHAPE stops.
RON
This is no graveyard...
Ron takes an unlit torch from the wall, touches it to the blue flames fluttering in Hermione's palms, and kneels. As he paints the floor with light, a SPARK SPITS from the torch and ignites a trail of FIRE.
RON
It's a chessboard.
Sure enough. As the chamber glows with light, a kind of battlefield is revealed, studded with faceless soldiers.
HERMIONE
But what're we to do?
As Hermione takes a tentative step onto the board, a BISHOP'S STONE SWORD drops heavily down, barring her way.
RON
It's obvious, isn't it? We've got to play pur way across the room. Excuse me...are we meant to join you?
as the bishop nods
Brilliant.
to Harry, Hermione
Now don't be offended, but neither of you are particularly good at chess—
HARRY
Just tell us what to do.
RON
All right. Harry, you take the empty Bishop's square. Hermione—you'll be the Queenside castle. As for me...
Ron leaps astride the only riderless horse.
RON
...I'll be a Knight.
HERMIONE
What happens now?
RON
We play.
Across the board, a WHITE PAWN moves forward two squares (e4). As Ron contemplates his own move, Hermione glances apprehensively at the fierce pieces across the board.
HERMIONE
Ron, you don't suppose this is going to be like real wizard's chess, do you?
Ron—contemplating something--doesn't answer immediately, instead gesturing to his own pawn.
RON
You there...d5
As Ron's BLACK PAWN obliges, WHITE'S PAWN slides swiftly forth (to d5) and, with a THUNDEROUS collision, the black pawn EXPLODES, rubble raining to the ground.
RON
Yes, Hermione? I think this is going to be exactly like wizard's chess.
DISSOLVE TO:
...the chess board, a real battlefield now, littered on both sides with fallen pieces. Ron, drained but intense, surveys the board, MUTTERING to himself.
RON
Think...Think.
deciding
Castle to ...c3
The BLACK CASTLE advances. Instantly, the WHITE QUEEN sweeps forward and, with cruel indifference, SHATTERS the Rook. Harry, only one square removed, stares with horror.
Unnerved, he glances up at Ron, but Ron's eyes see only the board. Harry turns, taking a look himself...and blinks.
HARRY
Wait a minute...
pointing to the Queen
She's made the same mistake I always make. If I go there, she has to take me, and the King is exposed!
Ron nods, but it's clear he doesn't share Harry's enthusiasm.
RON
There's just one problem with that. It's you that has to go on, Harry. I know it. Not me. Not Hermione. You.
HARRY
No, Ron...
HERMIONE
What is it?
HARRY
He's going to sacrifice himself.
HERMIONE
No. There has to be another way!
RON
Do you want to stop Snape from getting the Stone or not!
turning to Harry
You understand, right, Harry? Once I make my move, the Queen will take me. Then you're free to check the King.
Harry stares at Ron—an understanding between them—then simply nods. Ron grips the reins then and, without a word, drives his horse forward (Nh3). Instantly, the White Queen POUNCES. As Ron hits the floor, Hermione SCREAMS. She starts to go to him, when Harry holds up his hand.
HARRY
No!
AS SHE FREEZES
Don't forget we're still playing.
Hermione nods, staring at Ron. Harry steps forward (Bc5).
The WHITE QUEEN moves to block (Qe3), but it's futile.
Harry stares at her, eyes full of hatred, then steps forward, places his trembling hand on the cold stone of her gown and, with the gentlest of shoves...topples her.
HARRY
softly
Checkmate.
As a veil of dust hovers, the white king removes his CROWN, lets it roll from his fingers, across the stone floor, where it comes to rest at Harry's feet. Harry stares at Hermione's stricken face.
HARRY
If you can, go to the Owlery and send a message to Dumbledore. Ron's right. I have to go on.
Hermione turns, her eyes glittering. Without warning, she rushes forward, embraces Harry.
HERMIONE
You're a great wizard, Harry Potter! You are, you know!
HARRY
a bit embarrassed
Not as good as you.
HERMIONE
Me! Books. And cleverness. There are more important things—friendship and bravery and—-oh, Harry, be careful!
She turns then, goes to Ron. Harry studies his two friends, then looks away. The remaining chessmen bow, parting the way to the next door. He steps forward.
INT. LAST CORRIDOR - MOMENTS LATER
Alone, Harry makes his way through a corridor that drops down like a tunnel. Up ahead, a chamber glimmers.
INT. THE LAST CHAMBER - NIGHT
Harry descends a staircase. As the chamber below comes into view, he sees a FIGURE standing before the Mirror of Erised.
HARRY
You!
The figure turns. It is Professor Quirrell.
HARRY
No. It can’t be. Snape...
QUIRRELL
Mm, yes, he does seem the type, doesn't he? So useful Snape. Swooping around like an overgrown bat. Next to him, who would suspect p-poor st-stuttering Professor Quirrell?
HARRY
But that day, during the Quidditch match...Snape to kill me.
QUIRRELL
No, dear boy, I tried to kill you. And, trust me, if Snape's cloak hadn't caught fire and broken my eye contact, I would've succeeded. Even with Severus muttering his little countercurse.
HARRY
Snape was trying to save me?
QUIRRELL
Oh, don't misunderstand. He hates you, just as he hated your father when they were at Hogwarts together. But he never wanted you dead. Your father, after all, saved his life once, long ago.
Harry looks stunned. Quirrell looks amused.
QUIRRELL
Didn't know? Surprising, given how curious you are Potter. I knew you were a danger to me right off. Especially after Halloween.
HARRY
You let the Troll in.
Quirrell nods, examining the Mirror as he speaks:
QUIRRELL
Yes. I have a way with trolls. Snape, unfortunately, wasn't fooled. While everyone else was running about the dungeons, he went straight to the Third Floor to head me off. That three­ headed dog didn't even manage to bite Snape's leg off properly. He, Of course, never trusted me again. Rarely left me alone,. But he doesn't understand. I am never alone. Never...
frowning
Now what does this mirror do? I see what I desire, I see myself holding the Stone. But how do I get it?
VOICE (O.S.)
Use the boy.
Harry glances about in horror as the DARK VOICE echoes. Quirrell turns, eyes Harry.
QUIRRELL
Come here, Potter.
Quirrell points to the mirror. As Harry steps in front, he sees himself, looking pale and scared. Then, slowly, his reflection SMILES, puts its hand in its pocket, and pulls out a BLOOD-RED STONE. Harry's own eyes widen—in a mixture of stunned disbelief and fear. Struggling to control his expression, he shuts his eyes briefly...as if making a wish...lets out a breath, and opens them once again. His reflection WINKS, returns the Stone to its pocket and, to Harry's amazement...
...it DROPS HEAVILY into his own: He's gotten the Stone.
QUIRRELL
studying him
What is it? What do you see?
HARRY
I...I'm shaking hands with Dumbledore.I...I've won the House Cup.
VOICE (O.S.)
He lies.
QUIRRELL
Tell the truth! What do you see!
VOICE (O.S.)
Let me speak to him.
QUIRRELL
Master, you are not strong enough.
VOICE (O.S.)
I have strength enough...for this.
Quirrell reaches up, unfurls his turban. In the mirror, Harry watches a FACE appear...on the back of Quirrell's head.
HARRY
in a whisper
Voldemort.
VOLDEMORT
Harry Potter. We meet...again.
Petrified, Harry stares at the face. It is hideous, constantly changing, struggling to become whole.
VOLDEMORT
Yes. You see what I've become. Unicorn blood can sustain me, but it cannot give me a body of my own. But there is something that can. Something that, conveniently enough...lies in your pocket.
Harry wheels, dashing toward the staircase.
VOLDEMORT
Stop him!
Coolly, Quirrell SNAPS his fingers and, just as Harry reaches the threshold, FLAMES SHOOT from the floor, barring his way.
VOLDEMORT
Don't be a fool, Harry. Why suffer a horrific death, when you can join me...and live.
HARRY
Never!
VOLDEMORT
Ah, bravery. Your parents had it too. Tell me, Harry...would you like to see your mother and father again?
Harry stops, looks up. Quirrell steps aside, Voldemort's face sliding from the glass and revealing...Harry's parents.
VOLDEMORT
Together, we can bring them back. All I ask...is for something in return.
Slowly, almost involuntarily, Harry removes the Stone from his pocket.
VOLDEMORT
That's it, Harry. There is no good and evil, there is only power, and those too weak to seek it. Together, we'll do extraordinary things. Just...give me the Stone.
Harry studies his parents' faces, drifting to his mother's, when...we RACK FOCUS...and Voldemort's hideous face surfaces through her's...and she is gone.
HARRY
Liar!
Voldemort's eyes narrow.
VOLDEMORT
Kill him.
Instantly, Quirrell flies across the room, knocking Harry clean off his feet and the Stone tumbling from his grasp.
Quirrell drops, his hand closing on Harry's neck. Harry winces at the touch, face creased in pain, looking up into Quirrell's face, when....for the briefest of moments—it becomes Voldemort's. Harry gasps, struggling, when—to his amazement—Quirrell's own face returns, SCREAMING, releasing Harry and recoiling.
QUIRRELL
Wh-what is this magic?
Harry, breathing hard, follows Quirrell's gaze, stares in horror: Quirrell's fingers are slowly turning to dust.
VOLDEMORT
Fool! Get the Stone!
Harry rises, looks at Quirrell's withering fingers, then to his own hands, healthy and whole. As Quirrell starts to move, Harry, in the flash of a second...
...decides. He bolts forward, reaches up with both hands and...presses them to Quirrell's face.
Quirrell SCREAMS, but Harry holds tight, growing weaker as the face under his fingers begins to DISSOLVE until, finally, just when Harry looks ready to pass out...
Quirrell's face drops away.
Harry staggers back. Quirrell's body steps forward, blindly lurching towards Harry, and then...crumbles to dust. Harry stands still, just staring, then turns wearily, picks up the Stone, when...an APPARITION—bearing Voldemort's devilish face—SWOOPS up behind. Harry spins, watching in terror as...
WHOOSH!—in a VIOLENT RUSH—Voldemort returns to DUST and WHISTLES FORWARD, passing through Harry, blasting him back -- through the air and onto the stone floor. As the dust disappears, all is quiet once more, and we CUT TO:
WIDE SHOT
Of Harry. Lying on the floor. The Stone glimmering dully in his palm.
INT. HOGWARTS HOSPITAL WING - DAY
A PAINTING...of an INJURED SOLDIER lying in a HOSPITAL BED. A NURSE enters the frame, begins to tend to his dressings as...
Harry awakens in a hospital bed of his own. On the table next to him, TREATS are piled high, including a raft of open WIZARD CARDS. In one, Dumbledore beams down.
DUMBLEDORE
Good afternoon, Harry.
Harry squints, as if the card itself had spoken to him, then sees that the real Dumbledore is sitting on the windowsill. The great wizard slides off, gestures to the treats.
DUMBLEDORE
Tokens from your admirers.
HARRY
Admirers?
DUMBLEDORE
What happened down in the dungeons between you and Professor Quirrell is a complete secret—so naturally the whole school knows. Your friend Ronald has saved you the trouble of opening your chocolate frogs. Though one suspects Agrippa and Ptolemy still elude him.
HARRY
Ron was here? Is he all right? What about Hermione--
DUMBLEDORE
Fine. Both of them. Madame Pomfrey has explicitly forbidden visitors. But I think—with the help of a certain cloak— they've managed to monitor your progress.
HARRY
But what happened to the—
DUMBLEDORE
Relax, dear boy. The Stone has been destroyed. My friend Nicolas and I had a little chat and agreed it was best all around.
HARRY
But then, Flamel...he'll die, won't he?
DUMBLEDORE
He has enough Elixir to set his affairs in order. But, yes, he will die. To one as young as you, I'm sure it seems incredible. But to the well-organized mind, death is but the next great adventure.
HARRY
But to destroy such a remarkable thing...
DUMBLEDORE
Yes, yes. As much money and life as one could ever want—the two things most human beings would choose above all else. Unfortunately, humans do have a knack for choosing precisely those things that are worst for them.
HARRY
How is it I got the Stone, Sir? One minute I was stating in the mirror—
DUMBLEDORE
Ah. You see, only a person who wanted to find the Stone—find it, but not use it— would be able to get it. One of my more brilliant ideas and, between you and me, that's saying something.
HARRY
Does that mean—with the Stone gone, that is—that Voldemort can never come back?
DUMBLEDORE
I'm afraid there are other ways for him to return. And when—if—he does, it will take someone willing to fight a losing battle to stop him again. Someone like your parents. Someone like you.
HARRY
troubled
Professor Dumbledore. Voldemort said...if I gave him the Stone, he could bring back my...family. Could he have, sir? Really?
DUMBLEDORE
Some people are like mirrors, Harry. They reflect our most desperate desires. We see what they want us to see. As painful as it surely was...you made the right choice.
Harry nods. Dumbledore studies him thoughtfully.
DUMBLEDORE
Do you know why Professor Quirrell couldn't bear to touch you, Harry? It's because of your mother. She sacrificed herself for you. And that kind of act leaves a mark.
Harry reaches up to his scar.
DUMBLEDORE
No, this kind of mark cannot be seen. It lives in your very skin. It is the very thing someone like Professor Quirrell—full of hatred and greed—cannot understand. Or bear to touch.
HARRY
What is it?
DUMBLEDORE
Love, Harry. Love.
Dumbledore looks away then, smiles at Harry's treats.
DUMBLEDORE
Ah! Bertie Bott's Every Flavor Beans! I was unfortunate enough in my youth to come across a vomit flavored one, and since then I'm afraid I've lost my liking for them. But I think I'll be safe with a nice toffee.
popping it
Alas! Ear wax!
INT. MARBLE STAIRCASE - NIGHT
As Harry limps down the staircase, he can hear the good cheer of those feasting beyond the doors of the Great Hall. Below, Hermione and Ron stand talking. Harry stops, simply studying them, then they turn, see him. Nothing is said for a moment.
All of them beyond words. Then Harry nods to Ron's-bruises.
HARRY
All right there, Ron?
RON
All right. You?
HARRY
All right. Hermione?
She smiles.
HERMIONE
Never better.
INT. GREAT HALL - NIGHT
The roaring Hall is bedecked in GREEN AND SILVER—Slytherin colors—in honor of their winning the House Cup.
RON
D'you think Dumbledore meant for it all to happen? And for you to do it? Sending you your father's cloak and all?
HERMIONE
Well, if he did—I mean—that's terrible. You could have been killed. Come to think of it, I could've been killed...
HARRY
I think Dumbledore knows pretty much everything that goes on here. The only thing I don't understand is Snape...
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Professor Snape, Potter.
Harry looks up, sees Professor McGonagall there.
HARRY
Yes, of course. I was only wondering. Is it true? Did he hate my father?
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
They were not compatible personalities, if that's what you mean. And then, of course, your father did something Severus could never forgive.
HARRY
What was that?
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
He saved his life.
Astonished, Harry glances at Snape sitting at the High Table.
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
I suppose he felt it his obligation ...to look after you this year.
RON
Of course! And now that he's squared things, he can hate Harry in peace, right, Professor?
PROFESSOR MCGONAGALL
Hogwarts teachers do not hate their students, Mr. Weasley...
pointedly, as she exits
No matter how taxing they may be.
R0N
I think she's warming up to me.
At the High Table, Dumbledore rises and the Hall quiets.
DUMBLEDORE
Another year gone! Now as I understand it, the House Cup needs awarding, and the points stand thus: tn fourth place, Gryffindor, with 312.
Percy turns and glares at Ron.
RON
You'd think saving the bloody school from a Dark Lord would count for something.
DUMBLEDORE
In third place, Hufflepuff, with 352. In second, Ravenclaw, with 426. And in first place, with 472 points...Slytherin House.
The Slytherin table erupts. Draco Malfoy, banging his goblet, casts a smirk at Harry, Ron and Hermione.
DUMBLEDORE
Yes, well done, Slytherin. However, recent events must be taken into account. I have a few last minute points to award.
The hall goes very STILL. The Slytherin smiles FADE a bit.
DUMBLEDORE
First, to Miss Hermione Granger, for the cool use of intellect when others were in grave peril... fifty points.
As the Gryffindors cheer, Hermione looks overwhelmed.
DUMBLEDORE
Second, to Mr. Ronald Weasley, for the best played game of chess Hogwarts has seen in many years...fifty points..
PERCY
My youngest brother, you know!
DUMBLEDORE
Third, to Mr. Harry Potter, for pure nerve and outstanding courage, I award Gryffindor House...sixty points.
The DIN is deafening as Hermione makes the calculations.
HERMIONE
Oh my goodness. We've tied Slytherin!
DUMBLEDORE
And finally...it takes a great deal of bravery to stand up to our enemies, but even more to stand up to our friends. I therefore award 10 points to...Mr. Neville Longbottom.
As the room ROARS and the HOURGLASSES shift, a stunned Neville accepts wild slaps on the back.
DUMBLEDORE
Assuming my calculations are correct, I believe a change of decoration is in order.
umbledore CLAPS his hands and--instantly—the green and silver of Slytherin-become the scarlet and gold of Gryffindor. Neville, white with shock, disappears under a pile of people hugging him. Draco Malfoy, looks stunned and horrified. Snape, with a horrible, forced smile, shakes Professor McGonagall's hand, then catches Harry's eye, his hatred still evident, but not enough to mar the moment. Harry considers the cheering faces’ that surround him, alone in the eye of a happy huricane. For a moment, he is not part of them, just watching. Then his voice joins the others, his face saying it all...
This is a long way from the cupboard under the stairs.
EXT. HOGSMEADE STATION - NEXT DAY - DAY
The Hogwarts Express stands steaming, ready to depart. From the doorway, Ron calls to Harry, alone on the platform.
RON
Come on now, Harry.
Harry glances about once more, then starts for the train.
HAGRID
Didn' think yeh'd be leavin' without sayin' goodbye, didya?
Harry stops, smiles as Hagrid comes loping forward. Hagrid hands him a LEATHER-COVERED BOOK.
HAGRID
That there's fer you to open on the train. Which seems to be leavin', by the way.
Harry holds out his hand. Hagrid takes it, then pulls him into a rough hug.
HAGRID
Go on now. An' Harry? If tha' dolt of a cousin o' yers Dudley gives yeh any grief, yeh can always threaten ter give 'im a pair o' ears ter go with that tail of 'is.
HARRY
But Hagrid. We're not allowed to do magic away from Hogwarts. You know that.
HAGRID
I do...
a wink
But yer cousin don't.
INT. TRAIN COMPARTMENT - DAY
Ron half-dozes against the window, while Hermione does some "light reading." Harry sits opposite them, studying Hagrid's gift curiously. Then he opens it. Inside, the pages are filled with WIZARD PHOTOGRAPHS. Smiling and. waving at Harry from every page are the faces he first saw in the Mirror of Erised. The faces of his mother and father.
As the train lurches forward, Hermione looks up.
HERMIONE
Feels strange, doesn' t it? To be going home.
Harry traces his finger over the smiling face of his mother, then looks up, following Hermione's gaze to the window.
HARRY
I'm not going home...Not really.
EXT. TRAIN - MOVING AWAY - SAME TIME
As Harry peers out, his face is calm. Peaceful. Hogwarts Castle glimmers in reflection on his window and we...
PULL AWAY
...rising high above Hogsmeade Station, above the Dark Forest and Hogwarts Castle itself as the Scarlet Express glitters far below, making its way back to the Muggle world. Slowly, we...
FADE TO BLACK

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Opinions, by Claude Washburn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Opinions

Author: Claude Washburn

Release Date: April 5, 2023 [eBook #70465]

Language: English

Produced by: Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             available at The Hathi Trust)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OPINIONS ***





                               OPINIONS

                       BOOKS BY CLAUDE WASHBURN


                     PAGES FROM THE BOOK OF PARIS
                            GERALD NORTHROP
                                 ORDER
                          THE LONELY WARRIOR
                      THE PRINCE AND THE PRINCESS
                            THE GREEN ARCH




                               OPINIONS

                                 _by_

                            CLAUDE WASHBURN


                               NEW YORK
                       E. P. DUTTON AND COMPANY
                              PUBLISHERS


                        _First published 1926_


         Printed in Great Britain by T. and A. CONSTABLE LTD.
                  at the University Press, Edinburgh


                                  TO

                             T. R. YBARRA


     Of the following essays, ‘Zenith’ and ‘Black-and-White’ originally
     appeared in _The Freeman_, ‘Sophistication’ and ‘The French’ in
     _The Nineteenth Century and After_. My thanks are due to the
     editors of both publications for permission to reprint those essays
     here.

                                                               C. C. W.







PREFACE

_Which should by all means be read, being quite as much an essay as any
one of those that follow, and, if not the best, at any rate the
shortest; so that it affords a swift and almost painless means of
determining whether it is worth while to borrow the book._


Opinions are troublesome things, especially to a writer of novels.
Members of the latter, not very lovable tribe frequently assert that the
characters they create acquire a life of their own, take the bit in
their teeth, and become altogether unmanageable. This is as it may be.
Novelists are not among the most veracious of people, and are apt to
state as true, if in a whimsical deprecatory manner, things about their
work that they only wish were true. ‘How did I come to write
_Wayfarers_? Really I can hardly say. Once begun, the book seemed to
write itself.’

What is much more certain is that opinions have a life of their own.
They form gradually in one’s mind and must be got rid of ever so often,
like clogging sediment in a water-pipe; they _will_ be expressed. And
the reason that they trouble especially the writer of novels is that he
will again and again find himself putting them in the mouths of
characters who would never have held them.

For it is a curious fact that a writer cannot rid himself of opinions
(or of anything else) save by writing them down in a book. He may unload
them repeatedly on conversation, he may shout them to the
house-tops--all to no avail. But once he has embalmed them in print he
is released from them, perhaps does not even believe in them any longer,
and sets involuntarily about collecting other different opinions.

Why this should be so is a mystery. Unless the writer is even more than
usually vain, or unless he is one of the very few whose books are in
every home and whose opinions therefore presumably sway thousands (only
I don’t believe they do), he must in his heart be aware that nothing he
has written has had the slightest effect on any one, that nothing any
one has written has had much effect, and that immortality is a myth. No,
there he and I are wrong. There _is_ one way to literary immortality, a
small immortality but assured: to have a book printed in the Tauchnitz
Edition. Miss Rhoda Broughton’s name may be to the world at large but a
shadowy memory, Mrs. Mackarness’s a total blank, but for ever and ever,
on rainy afternoons, in dingy German or Italian _pensions_, elderly
English spinsters will, in default of anything else to do, read tattered
Tauchnitz copies of _Cometh Up as a Flower_ and _A Peerless Wife_. They
will be bored--but they will read them.

At any rate, your writer of novels, if he is to go on writing novels
that at all satisfy him for the moment (though why he should, God
knows!), must occasionally get rid of his opinions by means of a volume
of essays; which does him good and does no one else any harm.

And that is what I have set out to do here.




CONTENTS


                  PAGE

PREFACE       ix

ON LIVING ABROAD                                                       1

ZENITH                                                                25

DISILLUSIONMENT                                                       40

SOPHISTICATION                                                        53

MEDITATIONS ABOUT WOMEN                                               69

LEGEND                                                                85

TRUTH AND FICTION IN ITALY                                            97

LUIGI PIRANDELLO                                                     116

THE FRENCH                                                           139

PORNOGRAPHY                                                          152

SUCCESS                                                              166

BLACK-AND-WHITE                                                      180




ON LIVING ABROAD


This is not an essay in defence of living abroad nor yet a plea to
others to choose such a life. Rather, it is in the nature of a
dispassionate explanation intended respectfully for those who wonder why
a good many Americans who are neither loafers nor sentimentalists
endeavouring to escape backward into what they fancy to have been the
Utopian life of the twelfth century (or was it the thirteenth?) do
prefer living abroad to living at home.

The first and very natural objection of such readers would probably be:
‘You are cut off from the life to which you belong.’ But is this really
true? It would be true of, say, an Italian coming to America. He is
indeed cut off, and unless he has a very strong personality his
character suffers for it. A certain looseness comes. But it is not
equally true of an American who emigrates to Italy. The Italian has
strong bonds, roots that go down and down and link him to an
incalculable past. (Which is both valuable and harmful). The American
lives like some drifting rootless water-plant. Family for him is
something to get away from; at least it does not postulate the
obligations it does abroad. And he has seldom ties of place. So few
Americans live at maturity in the house or even in the town where they
were born that those who do are made the subject of quaint, rather
emasculated, dialect stories in our more expensive monthly magazines.
There is an appearance of national life because so many thousands are
doing the same thing at the same time--reading the same advertisements,
wearing the same kind of clothes, going to the same movies; but they are
not consciously performing the same duties. In existence we are a
gregarious nation, but existence is nothing; in real life we are
intensely lonely, isolated individuals--as much so as if we lived in
Europe. Perhaps this would be as it should be, a foundation for
individual achievement, if we would recognize it and rejoice in it. But
no nation in the world is so wistfully desirous of a unity that, despite
appearances, it has not got. All sorts of judgments, mostly idiotic,
have been passed on Americans by Europeans, but there is at least one
which is profoundly true: that Americans want pathetically to be liked.
This is at once a sign of weakness in us and a proof of frustration; it
reveals the fact that we have not the unity we crave. We huddle together
for comfort, but, because we are doing childish insignificant things, we
get no closer for that. It is true that individuals can never get very
close to one another. Still, two men even at opposite ends of the earth
may exchange a few lines of writing that can profoundly influence the
life of each. But two men side by side, brushing their teeth ...?

So, leaving all this, one is not really leaving a life-in-common. If I
go to see a baseball game, what is it to me that ten thousand others are
also there watching it? The real question is: of how much value to me
and to _each_ of the ten thousand is the baseball game? Also, leaving
all this, one is thrown frankly upon himself. Living among people who
speak a different language and have different customs, he can no longer
be supported by that illusory sense of companionship. If he has any
strength of character he presently finds this an immense relief and
becomes aware that at home his time was recklessly wasted on a thousand
things that meant nothing to him--that did not touch his mind or his
heart. To take the most trivial example, the telephone system in Italy
or France is so bad that there he will almost never use a telephone;
which at once frees him from something very like tyranny.

This sense of freedom is not the least of the advantages of living
abroad. In large part, no doubt, it comes from one’s not really
belonging to the life about one, since however well one gets to know a
foreign country it always remains foreign, and though one acquire
fluency in the language it must always, unless learned in childhood, be
spoken more consciously--and conscientiously--than one’s own. But this
is not the whole story. One is, too, aware of a greater freedom
surrounding him in European--at least in Latin European--countries than
in his own America. There is stronger individualism, less herd spirit,
greater divergence of opinion. Individuals appear less like one another,
and eccentricities that would almost ostracize men from their
disapproving fellows in America are in France and Italy accepted with a
smile. The sensitive American, especially if he is one of the many who
have suffered bitterly at school and college and dully afterward from
the intolerable oppression of herd standards, breathes in this relative
freedom deeply with a sense of sudden release. It is true that after a
while, if he is observant, he perceives that the liberty is not, as
perhaps he first thought it, something deep affecting the fundamentals
of life, but, rather, a freedom from unnecessary rules for existence. He
may even come to explain it as the result of a number of very
superficial things--the comparative absence of standardizing
advertisements, for example, the lack of universally read magazines, the
smaller size of newspapers, the greater localism of feeling--though
whether such things are cause or result remains a question to him. At
any rate, even when estimated at only its proper importance, the sense
of freedom still remains as something gracious.

Curiously enough, as our expatriate learns to understand better this
delightful surface freedom, he begins to discern beneath it, in things
that have to do not with existence but with life, some very rigid
laws--more rigid than any _beneath_ the surface in his own
country--recognized unshirked duties. The greatest of these is the
accepted burden of the family. In America children early shake
themselves free from their parents. More often than not, a grown man’s
life is completely cut off from that of his father and mother,
especially after his marriage; he frequently lives in another city than
that where they live; the whole adventure of bearing and rearing him
becomes to them as well as to him almost as though it had not been; not
uncommonly he evades the responsibility of giving them a home when they
are in need of one in their old age. As for uncles, aunts, and cousins,
the average American avoids them with distaste. In Italy and France you
get the opposite extreme. Except in the detached, irresponsible and less
national aristocracy, family ties are tremendously strong. A family is
always closely bound together, even in its obscure ramifications of
cousinship. However much its individual members may dislike one another
they accept unquestioningly the family duties. Grave financial
sacrifices are assumed as a matter of course. In many years of living in
Italy I have never yet had servants who did not send the greater part of
their wages to their parents, or known a single individual of the
bourgeoisie or the provincial aristocracy who would not as a matter of
course give up something he really wanted to do with a friend for the
sake of something he ought to do for a relation. As for the peasants, no
matter how poor, they will support ailing brothers or cousins, and even
the wives and children of these, in perpetuity; for among the peasants,
who are the most truly Italian of all Italians, the family is law--the
only law.

This undoubtedly has its defects. The better an American comes to know
Italy or France (where the influence of the family is almost equally
strong) the more he feels the often disastrous tyranny of this universal
obligation. Yet it is more admirable than harmful; for in a world only
too full of greed and selfishness it supplies a bed-rock of
self-sacrifice, an anchor in something solid and permanent for the
individual, and it creates a strong national life, which we Americans,
for all our standardization of existence, are without. You have, in
short, in Italy and France, the exact opposite to life in America. In
the latter country there is unanimity, all but identity, of behaviour in
superficial things, with, beneath, no convictions, no obligations, a
chaotic emptiness; in the former countries below a surface freedom
approximating licence there is a life founded on stern unquestioned
laws.

One of the dangers (and they are many) for Americans who live abroad is
that, not sharing the real life of the country, they get all the surface
freedom without any of the underlying obligations. Trivial as the
American’s obligations at home were--obligations to speak, dress, and
behave like his fellows--they at least bound him to something, even if
it was a silly something; and it is safer to be bound by some duties,
though they are only to do a ‘daily dozen’ or to support
Americanization, than to be bound by none at all. For those Americans
who do not look beneath the surface, or, looking, do not care, or whose
character is weakened rather than strengthened by sudden freedom, the
Latin countries of Europe are a dangerous place of residence. I have
seen many such. They become very petty, very selfish, and so lazy that
they do not even take the trouble to learn decently the language of the
country in which they live, but play, instead, with other expatriates
like themselves. Since at home their standards were imposed from the
outside, instead of evolved from within, and are now at one stroke
abolished, they grow limp and flaccid in character and pick up any
tawdry vice that appeals to their standardless weakness. Frequently the
men go in for homo-sexuality, since somehow this seems to harmonize with
living futilely and prettily with nothing to do but to look after the
rose gardens about their villas. They are quite mad--in a mild suave
way. Their only care in life is that they are occasionally blackmailed.
Also they are gently fuddled most of the time. But their rose gardens
are very pretty.

However, this is by the way. What denationalized Americans of this sort
do is of no conceivable importance to any one, and the fact that they
might have failed to do it had they remained at home is of little
greater moment. They drift above life like soap-bubbles on a gentle
breeze, and when they burst no one even cares. The real question is:
what can be done by an American of a little more character with the
freedom that such as these misuse?

A great deal, I think. For a writer or a painter it is invaluable. It
gives him a blessed feeling of space around himself that becomes more
precious to him than all the soft comforts of America, that becomes
indeed the one superlative comfort. At last he has elbow-room--and peace
to think down to the bottom of his thoughts. Let him but guard his gift
of freedom jealously and he can have evening after evening of solitude.
In America he must have fought rudely to obtain even half-hours of
solitude, since nobody could understand that he wanted it. He builds up
about him now a peace that is not empty but the richest of all mediums.
Any flight, any surrender, any subterfuge, was justifiable to obtain
it--provided he does something with it; and if he does not, the
punishment will be swift and he alone the sufferer, for the full sense
of space will become an aching emptiness and his precious leisure a
burden.

A lesser but quite genuine advantage in living abroad is the wider
variety of one’s surroundings. I have lived in half a dozen different
cities or villages, besides those in which I have merely sojourned for a
short time, and each place had its own special flavour. To respond to
the stern austere beauty of the Syracusan plain and then to the blurred
softness of Taormina, to the dainty toy-like perfection of Lake Orta and
then to the breathless magnificence of Garda, is to draw from every side
of one’s nature. But there is also a wider human variety. One can know
more kinds of people here (I am writing now of Italy, where I have lived
longest) than at home. For example, in America I and all my friends are
barred from even superficial acquaintance with men who work with their
hands. This, no doubt, is chiefly because America has become an
industrial country, and it seems especially hard for members of other
classes to know industrial labourers anywhere. But in Italy, except in a
few large cities such as Milan and Turin, industrial workers do not form
a separate homogeneous class. There is this young man, who is the son of
your or some one else’s gardener, or that, who is cousin to the peasant
family at the foot of your hill. Besides which, Italy is largely an
agricultural country. The peasants are in some ways odd inscrutable
people, yet one does, with reservations, get to know those who live
near-by--as well, perhaps, as in America one gets to know one’s
neighbours, the insurance man, and the banker. (As far as that goes, a
peasant’s mind does not seem to me any more inscrutable than a
banker’s). But there is still another difference. In America manual
labourers are mostly of foreign birth, so that it is doubly hard to get
to know them. How _can_ I get in touch with a Finn? His language, his
antecedents, his manner of thought, all are strange to me. In the small
and delightful town of southern Minnesota where my father lived as a
young man, there appears to have been at that time a very agreeable
community life. The farmers in the country round about were of one
blood with the town-dwellers--chiefly of New England origin,
Anglo-Saxons all, save for a slight mixture of Germans; and the
professions in the town were recruited from among the sons of farmers. I
don’t know whether the townspeople had a feeling of social superiority
to the farmers; probably they had. But there was no gulf between them;
they were of the same race and understood one another. To-day the
townspeople remain principally Anglo-Saxon, but the country round about
is farmed by Swedes, Norwegians, and Finns. The townspeople do not
understand them nor they the townspeople. And you get the condition that
Mr. Sinclair Lewis depicted, if rather too gloomily, in _Main Street_.
In his unconvincing portrayals of a Scandinavian servant and a
Scandinavian labour agitator one felt him straining, unavailingly, for a
comprehension which he lacked the knowledge to attain.

In Italy peasants are of one race with the doctors, lawyers,
land-owners, and provincial aristocracy (as distinguished from that of
the great historic families in, for instance, Rome, which are
cosmopolitan in their way of living, and so mixed in blood through
intermarriage with foreigners that they are by now almost as American,
English, French, or Austrian as Italian). It is perhaps impossible to
know the peasants intimately, but it is not difficult to know them
fairly well; and such knowledge adds greatly to one’s experience. I
think there are times when all of us feel impatient at knowing none but
those who work with their brains and only think about or traffic in the
things that other men have grown or built with their hands. This is a
feeling easily capable of exaggeration. Carried too far it leads to the
foolish belief, not uncommon to-day, that only those who work with their
hands and create the physical wealth of the world are of value in
it--which, of course, would reduce all life to mere existence. But
perpetual contact with the earth does make for sanity and for something
not far removed from wisdom. I esteem the Italian peasants, especially
those of Tuscany, as highly as any class of men with which I am
acquainted. They are calm but alert; they are, I believe, in the main,
kindly; they are tenaciously attached to the land; they work
indefatigably; they have an infinitely deeper and truer culture than,
for example, the supposedly higher class of shopkeepers, and,
especially, a serenity approaching fatalism, that leads them to regard
all governments with indifference and consider wars in much the same way
as they consider earthquake or drought. There is a splendid permanence
about them. Acquaintance with them is the best antidote I have found to
that desperate apprehension of universal meaningless chaos that every
man must so often feel to-day--to what Mr. Bernard Shaw so well
expressed when he said it sometimes seemed to him that this world must
be a place used by the other planets as an insane asylum.

       *       *       *       *       *

In America, beneath the fevered surface, the jazz, the wild rush hither
and thither, the absence of contemplation, the divorce-fed looseness of
the married relation, there is, I think, a monotony, a dull-eyed
prosiness, against which all those surface things are perhaps but a
reaction. People do not read poetry (as all do in Italy); which is not
an indication of poor literary taste (since in Italy, as elsewhere, the
mass of people prefer bad poetry to good), but of either an inability or
a disinclination to feel vividly. The undergraduates of our great
universities are not, as in France or Italy, uncritical rebels against
all accepted conventions of life and letters, but for the most part as
conservative as their parents, caring little about politics save to
accept indifferently the Republican Party, caring nothing at all about
either old currents or new among the arts. Would students at our
universities ever riot because of the execution of a Francisco Ferrer?
Inconceivable! They become violently excited about sports, as do
students abroad; but that, again, is a surface excitement which does not
affect beliefs about life. Defeat in the annual football game would
hardly impel undergraduates at Harvard or Yale to risk their lives in
passionate protest.

This greyness follows Americans throughout their life and is due, I
think, to our over-complication of and concentration upon the surface
facts of existence. No matter what one does with existence, it remains a
dull thing. Radios, motor cars, telephones, vacuum cleaners--they are
all infinitely dull because they are all surface things that do not
trouble the heart or the brain. Existence is dull, but life, underneath
it, is a wild and thrilling adventure. What one does is nothing; what
one believes and feels is everything. ‘After all,’ said William James,
‘the most important thing about a man is what he thinks about the
universe.’ But if he does not think about it ...? For all its feverish
activity, America does not seem to me to have the fever of living. I
know of nothing more desolate than the exceedingly well done stories in
the most widely read of our magazines, which, to judge from its immense
circulation, must almost literally be ‘in every home.’ They are
virtually all about the facile success in business of handsome young men
with Arrow Collar souls. This tawdry shirking of life is, I believe (and
I wish I did not believe it), the mental attitude of most Americans. Mr.
Van Wyck Brooks has revealed it with a clear, terrible perfection, Mr.
Sinclair Lewis has satirized it tumultuously in terms of itself (and has
thereby, ironically, become popular), and numerous others have revolted
against it with futile bitterness. But there it is. And there, perhaps,
it must remain till some great national disaster sweeps away at one
stroke the glittering surface rubbish and the worship of it, and turns
men’s thoughts inward upon the emotions and desperately evolved
convictions that are real life and thrilling. The potentiality, the
potential life, is there; it must be. We are men and women like other
men and women. Life must be struggling beneath the choking surface.
Women bear children in agony. Men love, toil, suffer hardships. It is
only that our thoughts are directed elsewhere. It may be that if all our
press, all our monthly and weekly magazines, and everything else that
carries advertisements were wiped out for a single month, we should
begin to live. For advertisements are responsible for no small part of
the mischief. They waken our sense of romance or of beauty or of charm
and then try to convince us that these feelings, which belong to life
and have nothing to do with existence, can be thoroughly satisfied by
cake made with a special kind of baking powder or by somebody’s
chocolates or by perfume with an exotic name. Thus belittling the
emotion they conjure up, they make us smile sheepishly at it--and then,
in a half-hope, buy the chocolates or the perfume. They deliberately
confuse our sense of values. They depict beauty as a genial strumpet for
sale to any one at a reasonable price.

The word ‘beauty’ is at a discount to-day. One is wary of employing it.
The trouble is that in the ’nineties of the last century a very
loquacious group of aesthetes made a silly cult of the conception and
thereby so cheapened the word itself that even after thirty years it has
not quite recovered. This sort of thing always happens when an adjective
is turned into a noun. (Not, of course, that this had not happened to
the word ‘beautiful’ long before the eighteen-nineties--only never quite
so hard). As an adjective it modified facts and was thus related to
life; as a noun it is credited with an existence of its own and is thus
divorced from life. ‘A beautiful woman’ or ‘a beautiful landscape’ means
something very real and fairly definite, but ‘beauty’ all alone by
itself means nothing at all, or is at best an abstraction to be used for
convenience’ sake, and very carefully, in the midst of earthy
life-giving facts. Repeatedly employed, it nauseates the hearer and
reveals a lack of genuine feeling in the person who employs it. Where
the quality belongs, that the word too often mars, is in life itself; it
has no god-like existence of its own. There is no occasion to mention it
in a low reverent voice or to turn it into a thin cult. But as just this
has been so frequently done I have needed all this apologetic
introduction before venturing to say that one of the reasons for which I
live in Italy is the varied but almost universal beauty of the landscape
that encircles me in nearly any part of that country. I trust it may be
evidence of my cultless honesty in the matter when I say that I am not
in a perpetual state of thrill about my surroundings (though, to be
quite truthful, there do come rare, brief, and unexpected moments of
lifting delight in some sudden touch of loveliness), but, rather, feel
this quality of beauty in them as something friendly, breathed in with
the air. Often, because of long familiarity with the landscape about me,
I am not consciously aware that it is beautiful. Nevertheless, the fact
that it is so is never quite forgotten. If, though with every possible
advantage of space, leisure and friends, I had suddenly to live in
Patterson, New Jersey, or in Superior, Wisconsin, something of
tremendous importance would seem to me to have disappeared from my life,
and a background of serenity that enables me happily to do the little
that I can do as well as is possible for me would become a background to
be at any moment consciously subdued before I should be able to achieve
anything at all.

‘But all these things.’ a quite justifiably impatient reader might by
now object, ‘are no better than theories. You, who are by way of being a
writer, like and are able to live abroad, and it amuses you to depict
this as advantageous. But is it really? Let us have facts. Discarding
those degenerate rose-garden Americans, are there others to whom living
abroad has been of actual benefit?’

Well, if by ‘benefit’ is meant actual benefit to achievement, I honestly
cannot say. I know, or know of, a number of American writers and
painters who live in France or Italy, and I cannot truthfully claim that
I think any of their work as good as the best that is being done by some
in America itself. But that, unfortunately, proves nothing. Their
number, of course, is very small compared with the number of those at
home, and among these last only a handful are achieving work of
consequence. The significant question (which it is quite impossible to
answer) is whether these transplanted Americans are painting better
pictures or writing better books than, given the limitations of their
talent, they would have been able to write or paint had they stayed at
home.

If, on the other hand, the word ‘benefit’ is to be taken in a wider
sense than simply that of creative achievement, I can at once answer the
question in the affirmative, without (thank heaven!) having to confine
myself to artists and authors. One does not come readily to know these
expatriates of the best sort. They are isolated individuals who value
their isolation. (It is the rose-garden people who at first acquaintance
press you, with a pathetic wistfulness, to come to tea or dinner at
their villas). But some, to my good fortune, I do know, and I hear quiet
rumours of others--individuals scattered here and there, not all of them
by any means writers, painters or composers, but solitary absorbed
students of this or that period or local fragment of a period, or even
only (_only?_) of the intense modern life about them. Useless? I do not
think so. Being, necessarily, of independent means (though it is
astounding on how slender an income they are often content to live), it
is not essential for them to go on making money. Yet that, if they had
remained in America, is probably what the force of public opinion would
have compelled them to do. Instead of studying the development of the
Commedia dell’ Arte or the annals of the Medici or the history of the
Risorgimento or the development of co-operatives in pre-Fascista Italy,
they would have been selling bonds or juggling with real estate. It is
not probable that one would have found them useful members of more
serious professions, since it was precisely for that study of the
Commedia dell’ Arte or co-operatives that their minds were really
fitted. And even if the bits of curious knowledge that they dig up are
of no external value, or, though of some small value, are not passed on
to others, individuals of this sort are not without use both to their
adopted country and to the one they have deserted. In their
infinitesimal way they help toward the distant mutual understanding of
two races. They spin one thin spider’s thread across the Atlantic. For
they respect and partly understand the people among whom they live, and
are respected and partly understood by these. Some day, if the world
lasts that long, a vast number of such threads, entwined, will make a
cable that will bind two countries together as no governmental treaties
or commercial agreements or grandiloquent speeches by distinguished
momentary guests will ever bind them. It is not without significance
that on the outbreak of the war Americans living in Germany sided with
the Germans, Americans in France with the French. It indicated that
through daily intercourse such Americans had begun to see into the
hearts of another people, and had found them individuals like
themselves. Given enough of this peaceful interpenetration among all
nations, war would surely become more difficult.

Yet it is not the problematic value to others of the knowledge these
expatriated Americans acquire nor their slight influence upon
international relations that appears to me their real importance, but
what they have, quietly and almost unconsciously, done with themselves.
The few individuals of this sort whom it is my privilege to know seem to
me more fully developed, rounded, and, especially, grown-up than they
could possibly have become except through this way of living. I have
even now more friends, if vastly fewer acquaintances, in America than in
Europe, but not one among them is as mature and mellowed as are these
expatriates. They have, the latter, a tolerance, an illusionless
sympathy for mankind and an insight into human motives. They see men
solely as individuals.

Take, for example, my friend Etheredge (that is not his name). In a way
it is not fair to do this, since, to my mind at least, he is so very
much more of a person than any of the few other expatriates of this sort
whom I know as to be uncharacteristic. Nevertheless, he could not have
become what he seems to me to be without his many years of living
abroad, and also there is something to be said for taking not the
average but the finest exceptional result as a study of a type.

I first met Etheredge fourteen years ago, shortly after he had come to
live in Europe. He happens to be a painter (as also is his wife), but I
am not myself capable of judging as to whether he is a good painter or
not. Some of his pictures (which become increasingly abstract) move me;
some do not. I have heard supposedly competent critics say that they
were very good indeed, and others, equally expert, that they were very
poor. To tell the truth, I do not care in the least which they are. By
all American Standards Etheredge would, I suppose, be accounted a
failure, since he can hardly ever sell his pictures, and then for a
wretched price. And for that, too, I do not care in the least. It is in
his personality that Etheredge seems to me really important.

Even fourteen years ago, at thirty, he had an arresting personality.
There was something at once quiet and eager about him, as though he were
questioning everything without quarrelling with anything, which struck
me as rare. But I should not at that time have set him down as a
success. He had not yet found himself. He was not yet sufficient to
himself. Now, after fourteen years, he is. I know no one else who is so
completely rounded a personality, who accepts so simply the external
world and is so little troubled by it. He has built around himself a
wall not of indifference but of acceptance, against which waves break
unavailingly, within which he lives with his whole self, serenely,
gently and richly.

All this that I feel about Etheredge I express badly. I cannot
successfully put it into words. I make him sound smug and even selfish,
whereas he has come very near to abolishing self--and thus has grown the
more. The best I can do is to give up the attempt at portrayal and fall
back on a few tangible results. Thus, I am not alone in my estimate of
Etheredge. Quiet and unassuming though he is, people of distinction
gravitate toward him. He has, to my knowledge, exerted a profound
influence on three creative artists of international fame and upon a
number of other individuals of even greater sensitiveness and fineness
of character if of less effective talent. Again, if financial disaster
were to overtake me to-morrow, Etheredge would, I know, share with me
whatever he has. But it is not that which is of importance (he was
always generous), but the fact that, though his income is very small,
this would honestly seem to him now no hardship, of no importance. Yet
again, neither he nor his wife has ever made a single sacrifice to
comfort. They continue to live in one after another of the most
inaccessible places in all Italy--places with no water, places with no
light, places with toilet facilities straight out of the Stone Age. To
plan a Tour of Discomfort I could hardly do better than enumerate the
villages where they have lived. If this were ever for them an act of
heroism, if they ever gave an impression of struggling bravely against
heavy odds for the sake of the Higher Life, I should consider such
behaviour with distaste. But they never do. They simply ignore the
discomfort. All that mattered to them was that each of these places was
a place of singular beauty and interest. They _liked_ living in them.
And, whether I have made you feel Etheredge as important or have failed
to do so, it must, with this, surely be apparent that his kind of
development would be all but impossible in America.

There are things about Etheredge that exasperate me at times. I cannot,
for instance, understand both his and his wife’s failure to learn the
language. Their Italian is distressing. Now Italian shopkeepers and
servants are no worse than those or other countries--if anything, I
think, a little better, being capable of extraordinary acts of
generosity toward suddenly impoverished clients--but undoubtedly their
dominant thought in the presence of strange and presumably wealthy
foreigners living, heaven knows why, in their midst, and with difficulty
stammering mistakenly a few phrases of the language, is that the Lord
has delivered these into their hands. Accordingly, Etheredge and his
wife have been the victims of a long series of minor frauds and
peculations. I do not know why this should annoy me, but it does. It
does not annoy them; they disregard it.

Similarly, I am at times annoyed by Etheredge’s indifference to the
social movements that swirl madly around us all. It is, for instance,
impossible for me to watch the progress of Fascismo coolly. I feel
grudging admiration for the machine, resentment at the suppression of
free speech, bitterness at the cynical pretence of constitutionalism. I
cannot, in other words, keep Fascismo out of my life, any more than I
can keep out the problems of international relations, German indemnities
and the war debts. Etheredge can. He scarcely, I believe, thinks about
these things at all; certainly he does not think about them
passionately.

In this, I know at heart, I am wrong and he is profoundly right. For it
is on my part, and would be on his, a waste of energy to puzzle and
think and fume over these questions. Neither he nor I is fitted to cope
with them; neither of us can have the faintest influence upon them. And,
indeed, gigantic though they loom above the world to-day, they are but
ephemeral phenomena. Beneath, far beneath, lies the only truth--the
perplexed, troubled, struggling, human soul. Only contact with
individuals can have significance, either to them or to oneself. To such
relationships and to the beliefs and questions arising from them
Etheredge devotes his fine unwasted strength.

The influence he exerts is deep but not wide, and its necessarily narrow
range is, in my saner moments, the only thing I hold against him. Here,
I think, is a man of rare sympathy, insight and character. Must his
influence be exerted only upon the small number of individuals whom he
can personally know? Well, of course, there are his pictures, at which
he works with intense and persistent energy. They must to some extent
express his personality, and if the critics who call them good are in
the right they will doubtless some day reach a wider circle than that of
personal acquaintanceship. But, even so, comparatively few will see
them, and of these only a small proportion be able to understand clearly
the fine spirit they express. Another insoluble problem.

But, as I meditate upon it, I have a sudden happy suspicion that here,
too, I am in the wrong, still believing despite myself in widespread
movements, organization and the like. Perhaps, after all, the finest and
most hopeful thing about an apparently sorry world is that over its
surface are sparsely strewn men and women of matured developed charm or
intelligence or perception, who exert unconsciously the influence of
their personality on those in immediate touch with them. Why expect or
ask for more than this? And, certainly, if some of these can only attain
full self-development through living in another country than their own,
for their sake we can well afford to disregard the larger number of
silly snobs and rose-garden idlers that such a life creates.




ZENITH


If Mr. Sinclair Lewis’s fine novel, _Babbitt_, is simply the story of
George F. Babbitt, the only adverse comment I can make upon it is to
question whether that gentleman deserved such detailed and careful
study. One thing is certain: he does not deserve it a whit more if, as
some newspaper has asserted, there are ten million of him than if there
is only one.

But there are indications that Mr. Lewis intended also to depict the
city of Zenith and to show Babbitt and his friends as typical of its
spirit, to do with this novel for the city what he attempted to do in
_Main Street_ for the village. True, there are circles above Babbitt, in
which move William Eathorne, the banker (magnificently sketched), and
the McKelveys (not realized at all). And one is made to feel intensely
that beneath the all-too-articulate Babbitt and his friends are toiling,
almost inarticulate masses. ‘At that moment in Zenith, three hundred and
forty or fifty thousand Ordinary People were asleep, a vast unpenetrated
shadow.’ Nevertheless, it appears to me that in Babbitt, Vergil Gunch,
Howard Littlefield, and the others, Mr. Lewis intended to typify the
dominant spirit of Zenith. Indeed, if they did not typify it, if they
were not significant of anything greater than themselves, he would
hardly have taken such pains to depict them. ‘Vergil Gunch summed it up:
“Fact is, we’re mighty lucky to be living among a bunch of city-folks,
that recognize artistic things and business punch equally. We’d feel
pretty glum if we got stuck in some Main Street burg....”’ This sounds
very like special pleading.

Well, I recently spent a summer in Zenith. At least, it may well have
been Zenith. It is in the same part of the Middle-West and it looks like
the city Mr. Lewis describes. True, it has only 150,000 inhabitants,
whereas Mr. Lewis claims 340,000 for his city. But Mr. Lewis is himself
sufficiently of the Middle-West to be unreliable on this subject. And,
to tell the truth, his city does not feel like a city of 340,000. The
social items in its newspapers are too boisterous and unsophisticated;
it has, apparently, neither orchestra nor art gallery. No, Mr. Lewis’s
Zenith is my Zenith. But if this essay should happen to meet his eye,
and he should protest that I have selected a city quite different from
his, called it Zenith, and then set out to prove that it was not what he
said it was, I can only reply that he may be right, but that if the
Babbitts are not typical of a city of 150,000, still less are they
likely to be of a city of 340,000.

As I say, I recently spent a summer in Zenith; but any observations that
I make are not based solely on that single visit. My parents moved to
Zenith when I was six years old--which, alas, was long enough ago to
make them Old Residents by now; I lived there as a child, as a boy, and
during my summer vacations from college; and I have returned to Zenith
for six months or so every two or three years since. I have seen the
city grow and have noted the changes more sharply for the intervening
years of absence. And I assert that Zenith is not at all in spirit the
kind of place that Mr. Lewis implies.

Of course I did not know, not really know, even one individual among the
toiling throngs in the factories, at the steel plant, in the cement
works. How should I? And I did not know the Babbitt group, save,
superficially, a member here and there. But I observed them on the
streets and heard them talk in hotel lobbies, and I admired the accuracy
of Mr. Lewis’s eye and ear. The people I played with were the people who
take their diversion at the Country Club or give dinners at the Zenith
Club in the city proper. I saw them, too, at work in their offices:
lawyers, doctors, railwaymen, brokers, architects, contractors,
merchants; young men of twenty-five to forty; middle-aged men of forty
to sixty-five; and their wives and daughters. A not unfair cross-section
of Zenith life, once the hopeless separation from the vastly larger mass
of manual labour beneath is admitted, and I think they were more
numerous than the Babbitts. Of course I do not profess to have known
them all; but I am not concerned with their numbers. The point is that
they _were_ Zenith. They gave the city its tone; you felt them in
looking at the blocks and blocks of handsome houses; they made the
Babbitts appear not so much shoddy as unrepresentative, insignificant;
their composite soul was the soul of Zenith.

What, then, were these people like? In any profound sense that is a
difficult question to answer. There was a deep similarity among them;
something important that they all had in common, but something that was
very hard to get at. It is, however, easy to say what they were not
like. They were not like the Babbitts; they were not at all like the
McKelveys or Horace Updike, the people whom George Babbitt longed to
know; they were not like the characters in Mr. Hergesheimer’s
_Cytherea_, nor like those in Margaret Banning’s _Country Club People_.
They were less sophisticated, if to be sophisticated means to have a
weary air and to say cynical things cleverly; they were more so, if it
means to be reasonably well educated, to stand unconsciously for some
reality (no matter what), and to have ease of manner.

The strongest impression they made on me was that of smoothness. Their
homes ran quietly, despite perpetual servant trouble; they entertained
easily; even the weekly dinner-dance at the Country Club gave me a sense
of smoothness that was rather delightful. The immense dining-room would
be crowded--scores of big tables and little tables almost uncomfortably
filled; but there seemed to be no friction, and the voices were a
well-modulated hum, pleasant to hear. People did not seem to get in one
another’s way; and that was true mentally as well as physically. They
were very well-bred and they were not at all self-conscious. Almost,
these people, collectively, had grace. A kind of delightful suavity
surrounded them, that was like the suavity of their smoothly running
Packards and Cadillacs.

Not that they all had Packards or Cadillacs. Many of the younger men
were still struggling near the bottom of the business ascent; a great
many were less than well-to-do; a few were known to be virtually down
and out. But the point is that none of them, even among these last, ever
so much as questioned the system. Hatred and jealousy of individuals
there must have been; a revolt against the collective whole, or even a
doubt of its importance, none whatever.

They were so very sure of themselves, so beautifully sure. They had
something of the easy charm one sniffs up at the tea-room of the Ritz
(in Paris). They were so sure of themselves that if an outsider
expressed radical opinions or even questioned rudely the importance of
the reality for which they stood, these Zenith people were not annoyed,
but, quite politely, amused. They were, in fact, civilized.

This was the dominant surface impression that I carried away from Zenith
after my last visit, and it is so different from anything that I have
read or heard about even the smallest minority in any Middle-Western
city that I have gone about telling it to a number of people--in New
York and elsewhere. My listeners, when at all interested, were
sceptical, and usually observed that Zenith must be very different from
most Middle-Western cities--a special case. It may be so. I do not
profess to generalize about the whole region. Zenith is the only
Middle-Western city that I know well. But I am doubtful. I rather fancy
that people are corrupted by literature. They do not see things for
themselves, even those close-by; instead, they read in novels or plays
that things are thus and so, and take the author’s word for it. And the
author, himself, I fancy, is frequently writing about what he, too, has
read to be thus and so. One sees Victor Margueritte, for example,
becoming uncomfortably aware (like all the rest of the elderly writers,
through hearsay) that something dreadful has happened to the younger
generation, and then setting out to write about it in _La Garçonne_--a
work as sheerly literary, lacking in observation, and impossible in its
psychology, as a novel by Florence Barclay.

But, to return to the people of Zenith, I found them very like well-bred
people anywhere else--like, say, well-bred people in Philadelphia or in
an English city. They read--the women, anyway--desultorily, as people
everywhere read, but books demanding some effort: _The Revolt against
Civilization_, _The Education of Henry Adams_, novels by Couperus,
Bojer, and Knut Hamsun; almost never poetry. They did not know a great
deal about pictures--at least, pictures and statues were not an intimate
part of their lives--because in Zenith there was no art gallery; they
did not have daily opportunity to look at pictures. But a great many of
them were intelligently and sincerely fond of music, because there was
much good music to be heard every year in Zenith. A string quartet would
be glad indeed to draw such a house in New York as it draws in Zenith.

When you come to think of it, all this is natural enough (except perhaps
the intensity of their love for music--but I shall say more of that
later). There is no reason outside of literature why these people should
have been crude or conventionally Middle-Western. Virtually all of them
had been away to school or college, probably half of the younger men and
a much larger proportion of the younger women in the East; all had
travelled widely in America, and a great many, especially the women, in
Europe. A considerable number of the older ones go to California or
Florida for the winter.

There were, of course, different groups and eddies within this society.
There were the very young--the débutantes and their swains. I observed
them at the dances and talked casually with a few, but I really learned
little about them. My very superficial impression, which I give you for
whatever it may be worth, was that they had magnificent and amusing
_savoir-faire_, beneath which they hid an ashamed ingenuousness. I do
not know or greatly care what their morals were, but I should guess that
they were much the same as morals were among people of their age and
wealth ten years ago or twenty.

There was also the fast set, a small group of young married people.
Personally I saw nothing of them and can only repeat what I was told of
them by others: that they drank hard in order to experience some emotion
in promiscuous embraces, and that it was all hopelessly raw. I cannot
vouch for the truth of the description, but it sounded plausible. Having
refused to generalize about the whole of the Middle-West, I am certainly
not going to do so about the whole of the United States, but I can say
that, from what little I have seen of fast sets anywhere in America,
they have always seemed to me raw. I have seen elegance and swiftness
delightfully combined in Europe, but not in America. It may be that this
group in Zenith represented some obscure, desperate and futile revolt
against the smoothness of Zenith society, of the Zenith soul. If so, it
was pathetic, for it did not cause so much as a ripple. People did not
seem even shocked by it, only bored.

This, then, was the impression I received of Zenith people: smoothness,
ease, manner, something approaching grace, something approaching charm.
It was very delightful.

Still, I should not like to live in Zenith. For, if it has none of the
faults popularly attributed to the Middle-West, it has others,
unsectional, beneath and perhaps even in part the cause of its charm,
that trouble me deeply.

This society, which is the heart and mind and soul of Zenith, is
immensely conservative, immensely conventional, both morally and
mentally. It does not belligerently flaunt, or argue in favour of,
conventional standards; it accepts them as something settled a long time
since. There is a good deal to be said for this--or for a part of it.
Indeed, there is a good deal to be said for most of what Zenith does or
is. Is not more real freedom to be obtained through accepting certain
age-old conventions, such as that of marriage and married fidelity, for
instance, and then making the best of them, than through wasting one’s
strength in struggling against them, with no adequate substitute to
offer? But Zenith accepts too much. It accepts the Steel Corporation,
Mr. Gary, the American Legion, the Republican Party, the total
wickedness of the I.W.W., the sole responsibility of Germany for the
war, and the entire basic system of Capital and Labour as at present
existing, though it is willing to concede improvements in detail. But
this attitude probably makes for the almost suave charm of this society,
which is, after all, the same kind of charm that was to be found in
Upper-Middle-Class English society before the war.

These people are amazingly cut off from and ignorant of the vast
labouring class. They know that not one of themselves could be elected
congressman or mayor or even to membership on the school-board, but they
accept the fact coolly and without much resentment as revealing nothing
more than the jealousy of the ‘Have-Nots’ for the ‘Haves,’ of those at
the bottom for those who have deservedly reached the top. Yet they are
democratic among themselves, and, unlike the McKelveys, admit newcomers
easily, with no inquiry into their antecedents. They are not really
snobbish. Many of the men are employers of labour on a large scale, yet
even they seem to be merely exasperated by the increasing difficulties
in controlling their men, in much the same way that the women are
annoyed by the difficulty of getting and keeping servants. They talk of
demagogues, of Red propaganda, of the unwillingness of men to do an
honest day’s work, of labour unrest, of Bolshevism--oh, especially of
Bolshevism! But among even these employers I could detect no perception
that the whole economic system was being seriously questioned, and
certainly no perception of the numerical strength and growing unity of
the questioners. But it would not be fair to consider this ignorance in
the class of people I am describing as confined especially to Zenith or
the Middle-West. Where in the world does it not exist?

A lesser fault was that there was no good general conversation. Indeed,
there was virtually no general conversation at all. Perhaps this was
because the men did not join in. There seemed, in fact, to be a strange
separation of men from women in Zenith. The attitude of the men toward
the women was delightful--easy, courteous without being deferential in
the obnoxious Southern fashion--and the women’s attitude toward the men
was equally pleasant. But men and women seemed to have nothing in
common. They often did things together, played golf or bridge or tennis
or even went on long canoe-trips, but they did not think together. They
did not even appear to be united by sex-attraction. One simply did not
feel, not ever, the haunting presence of that restless vivifying
emotion. Zenith was uncannily, horribly cool. How in the world, I kept
wondering, did babies get born here? Still, they did, and their mothers,
with quite inadequate help, looked after them admirably. For real
amusement the men liked to get off by themselves, have dinner, drink,
and play poker or bridge. They were continually giving small parties of
this sort in some private dining-room of the Zenith Club. At one which I
attended a discussion of wives arose, the model wife being esteemed the
one who cheerfully let her husband go out any or every evening. On this
same evening a mixed dinner-party was being given in the ladies’
dining-room of the club, and when it was over the young men of that
party drifted into our smaller room for a few minutes. They sniffed up
rather wistfully the doggy atmosphere that pervades a stag-party and
helped themselves to drinks from the bottles on the sideboard. ‘And
where are you going now?’ one of us inquired. ‘Up to Jim’s house to play
bridge.’ ‘Think of it!’ exclaimed my host pityingly, as the victims to
sex filed out. ‘They’re going to Jim’s house--to play bridge--with
women!’

This absence of sex-attraction in Zenith gatherings was only one
expression of a lack that in course of time seemed to me almost
insupportable--the lack of thrill. Everything was too quiet, too even,
too reasonable. Nobody seemed ever to feel or think anything
passionately. The key was low, pulled down, like the decoration of the
houses, which was usually in good taste but so very sober and
restrained. These people, I said to myself, must have some emotional
outlet; what is it?

Well, the young men, no doubt, found an outlet in business. For it must
be remembered that among all these men there was not one professional
idler. It was one of the accepted conventions that a man must work. Some
of them were idlers by nature and worked, I dare say, as little as
possible; most of them worked almost fiercely, though not during such
long hours as had the men of their fathers’ generation. And they drank
hard at their stag-parties. I heard of one or two disreputable
road-houses in the country near-by, so somewhere in Zenith
sex-attraction did exist, but it existed as something outside the magic
circle. So far as I was able to learn, very few of the young men I knew
frequented those places. Their outlet was not women; they seemed
strangely uninterested in women; they did not even talk about them at
the stag-parties.

But what of the women, the younger women, themselves? They appeared so
cool, so reasonable, so sure of themselves, and so gracious, that it
seemed an impertinence to be sorry for them. Nevertheless, I was sorry
for them--secretly. What outlet did they have? It is true that they had
their homes to manage and their children to bring up. But, even with at
best inadequate servants--hardly ever more than one, never more than
two--and at frequent intervals no servants at all, this took only a
small part of their time. Their homes were so well organized, and
possessed, too, every known mechanical labour-saving device, from vacuum
cleaners to electric stoves. What did these attractive young women do
with their spare time? Well, they read, of course, and they gave or
attended a great many teas, at which no man was ever present. That could
hardly be an emotional outlet. Music, perhaps, was a partial one. As I
have said, there was excellent music to be heard in Zenith. There were
two concert courses every winter, to which came really great
artists--Paderewski, Mischa Elman, famous string quartets, the Vatican
Choir. And to these concerts, I feel sure, these young women listened
with intelligence and emotion. (Their husbands sat through the concerts
patiently). But even so? Zenith is, after all, only a small city. There
may have been fifteen concerts in a season. What about the rest of the
time? A few young women played exceedingly well, themselves. That might
really be an outlet. But most did not play well enough to find
satisfaction in playing at all, knowing what they knew of great music.
They went in for golf and boating, and they danced a good deal,
too--well, but without the grace of abandon. To me, for all their
perfection and intelligence, they seemed only half alive.

They _were_ intelligent, more so than their husbands--or perhaps more
grown-up. And in a way they were well educated. They knew something
about, were interested in, a great many subjects to which their husbands
were indifferent--music, Russian dancing, Scandinavian literature,
social welfare work, civic improvement, and so forth and so forth. But
it is true that they did not know any one thing thoroughly, as their
husbands knew their business. Again, I think, that was because they did
not know any one thing passionately. ‘What can have been their outlet?’
I asked a woman--not in Zenith. ‘Virtue, perhaps,’ she replied. They
seemed sadly wasted, somehow, those delightful young women, and only
half alive.

I think, perhaps, that subconsciously they were afraid of coming alive.
They filled their days deliberately with pretty, well-ordered,
superficial activities. They made existence so pleasant and so full that
it disguised the absence of life. A proof of this seemed to appear in
their gregariousness. They clung together in everything. If they wanted
to study a period of history they did not do it in solitude; they
organized a club among themselves to study it. They organized a club or
a class or a group for everything. It was as though they huddled
together, for comfort--and in fear. Fear of what? Of their individual
selves, I fancy. Groups have only a factitious life; real life is in the
individual alone. And I think these young women were afraid of real
life. So they were, I suppose, failures. But there was something finer
in their failure than in their husbands’ narrow success. The young men
were aware of but one possible activity in life--business; and threw
themselves into it desperately. The young women were aware of a score,
and, held back by all the pleasant conventions among which they existed,
and, unlike their husbands, by a vague perception of dark troubled
depths in the individual soul, threw themselves into none.

But how charming they were, how candid and clear and--oh, decent! I
wonder if they would mind if they knew that, even while admiring, some
one had found them, and Zenith, a little pathetic.




DISILLUSIONMENT


We can hardly fail to perceive that we are living to-day in a period of
profound disillusionment. There is nothing strange about that. Every
great war has brought disillusionment in its wake. What is of interest
is to examine the nature of the disillusionment and estimate its
probable results.

In the first year or two after the Armistice it was a bitter and
passionate thing, almost as sharply felt among civilians as among the
returned soldiers. Life appeared barren and profitless, religion a
mockery, civilization a myth. The young cursed the old for creating such
a mess; the old, though not conscious of having deliberately created
anything of the sort, were broken-hearted at the spectacle of what some
one must have done--and who, then, if not they? Governments were a
mirthless laughing-stock. Moral laws were thrown overboard; for if all
that moral laws had resulted in was _this_, of what possible value were
they? Marriage all but went to smash in favour of a cheap promiscuity.
No one believed in anything, no one trusted any one else; life resolved
itself into three elemental desires--for food and drink, excitement and
the gratification of sex. With all of which unrestraint, there was far
less happiness in the world than before. People were ‘fed up’--‘fed up’
even in the midst of their most reckless adventures in gaiety.

This summary of the state of mind in the year of grace 1919 is, of
course, exaggerated, but such was undoubtedly the impression one
received in any country that had seen the worst of the war.

The reason for the impression and also the reason why it was only a
fractionally true impression was that the hubbub was being raised by the
articulate minority. As some one has already pointed out, a considerable
majority of the world’s inhabitants were not disillusioned by the war,
having had no illusions to shed. Life had been hostile to them; they had
always been forced to give a great deal to get a very little; they had
never had the slightest faith in governments or in human goodness;
knowing marriage stripped to its bare essentials, they had always seen
it as a fact like any other, never as something sacred and beautiful;
they had always been as promiscuous as possible; they had never had the
opportunity to dress life up and worship it. Times were either a little
harder now or maybe not quite so hard. There was no occasion for all
this fuss, though, naturally, they took advantage of it to get as much
more for themselves as they could.

No, it was the articulate minority that was upset. But this, though
distinctly a minority, is very large. It does not consist of any one
class in a rigid social sense, but simply of all the people for whom
existence is relatively easy. I do not mean the people who have no
worries, are never hard-up, never in danger of bankruptcy, nor even
altogether people who do not work with their hands; I mean those whose
daily life is not among the hard primitive facts, who have not suffered
actual griping hunger, whose mental existence follows some sort of
order, whose work is not the deadening physical labour of mines,
steel-plants or the most squalid factories, and whose homes, however
imperfect, offer something better than the horrible promiscuity of one
or two crowded rooms. This class, if you can call it such, sees life
altogether differently than the majority beneath sees it, and it is
almost solely from this class that come the interpreters of life--the
thinkers, the writers, the artists, the journalists. Also the two
classes never really touch. The minds of each are alien to the minds of
the other. There are to-day many individuals among the minority who are
trying to get at and understand the minds of the majority; but they
cannot, because the majority live among facts, they among ideas about
facts. The attempt is as impossible as for a painted figure to step down
from its picture and walk the earth--or vice versa, since I do not in
the least mean that ideas about facts are necessarily less real than the
facts themselves. In short, one half not only does not but cannot know
how the other half lives. This is so true that when sometimes, rarely, a
writer of genius, such as Gorki, has struggled up from that great,
incoherently muttering sea, the account he gives of life there is to us
of the minority, even while it moves us, as strange as though it were
indeed an account of life in another element.

It was this minority that was disillusioned by the war, and, frankly, I
think we deserved to be--though perhaps somewhat less rudely. Not
because we had ideas about life, but because we had _such_ ideas--so
smooth, so smug, so unrelated to the facts, so inconsistent with what,
if we had only looked honestly, we might have seen in ourselves. For
example, individually none of us was more than spasmodically happy, none
contented; cowardice alone or, at best, habit and lack of initiative
restrained each of us from committing the most dastardly acts;
selfishness lay at the bottom of our behaviour; honest introspection
would have revealed to any one of us a handful of impulsive good deeds
to show against a lifetime of petty greedy actions the motives for which
had been painstakingly disguised: yet, by and large, we believed, really
did believe, that the world was growing steadily better, that there was
more good than evil in human nature (by which, if we had been honest and
intelligent, each of us could only have meant in the nature of every one
save himself), that certain things (of which every one of us was
capable) simply were not done by decent people, and that, given the high
state of moral progress in the world, wars were unthinkable.

The shock of the awakening (which did not come at its fullest during the
war, when thought was suspended, but afterward) was tremendous and
painful. And the pain and anger were all the worse for being, even if we
recognized it but dimly, directed against ourselves. That was the secret
of the wretchedness, the disillusionment, that the reason for feeling
‘fed up.’ We blamed it on civilization or governments or God; at heart
we knew it was ourselves who were to blame. Beginning with the hurt
recognition that the world was not as we had pictured it, we went on
logically to the gloomier recognition that we were not what we had
fancied ourselves. This was inevitable. A man who distrusts the honesty
of others is a man who secretly does not believe in his own honesty; a
man who is afraid to leave his wife and his friend alone together is a
man with whom his friend’s wife would not be safe.

The disillusionment, then, was potentially salutary. Stripping men of
false ideas and ideals, it forced them to look into their own hearts.

Only potentially salutary, however. In its first results it was sheerly
destructive; and this, too, was logical. The great Chicago fire of 1871
was doubtless a good thing in that it wiped out a sordid and ugly city,
but the first reaction to it of the inhabitants must have been despair.
Despair, at any rate, was the prevailing emotion in the hearts of most
thinking members of the minority during the chaotic period that followed
the Armistice. All these centuries to work with, and we had
achieved--this!

But there are two very noble traits in men, or in the best of them: a
fundamental love of truth and a refusal to accept defeat. So presently
such men began to shake off despair and to look about them
clear-sightedly, like Noah and his companions after they had emerged
from the Ark. And their love of truth, burning more clearly now that the
lamp was less encrusted with illusions, showed them some very heartening
facts: that the thirty centuries of recorded human life were not as
barren a waste as all that; that always, as far back as eye could see,
even in the midst of war, pestilence and external chaos, some men had
laboured patiently, and for no other reward than the satisfaction of
their love of truth, to guard and, bee-like, add a few drops to the
small store of knowledge transmitted to them; that explorers had charted
the earth and its seas, and astronomers mapped the movements of the
stars; that to have worked up from nothing more than a few primitive
sounds to the indescribable beauty of a Mozart symphony was an
achievement beyond all praise. True, men were also beasts. Nothing could
justify this war or ever excuse it. It was unmitigatedly evil, a crime
without a reason, for which not one or two or a dozen, but all men, were
responsible. But there, too, was that other side of men, that grazed
divinity. All was not lost, though ten million human lives were.
Civilization, many said gravely, might come to an end. Sad, if true,
but, at bottom, what of it? It would only be one civilization. Another
would follow. For what goes on indestructibly is the steady soul of
man, loving truth and never defeated. So I conceive such men as
meditating for a little while before going back to their patient work.

These, whether they knew it or not, were themselves among the lonely
guarders of the flame. But others besides them, many others among the
rest of us, have profited by our disillusionment. Indeed, we have
profited more than they, since their lives had always a noble directive
never entirely obscured, ours none.

One thing that we have gained is the spirit of wholesome mockery for
grandiloquent twaddle. This bubbled up to us perhaps from that great
mass beneath, which has moments when it is not inarticulate. In Italy,
some time about the weary middle of the war, when, as always, generals,
politicians, journalists, and diplomats at banquets never opened their
mouths or lifted their pens save to speak or write of ‘the Cause of
Liberty, Justice and Civilization’ and all the rest of it, a ribald
soldiers’ song suddenly swept the country and set it rocking with tonic
mirth, though how the song got about so universally is a mystery, since
it could not be sung in public. It had many verses, all equally
scurrilous, but it will suffice to quote one, the best known:

    _Il General Cadorna_
    _Scrisse a la Regina:_
    _‘Se vuol veder Trieste_
    _Si compri una cartolina.’_
    _Ah! Ah! Ah!_
    _Ah! Ah! Ah!_

(_General Cadorna wrote to the Queen: ‘If you want to see Trieste, buy a
picture postcard.’ Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah!_)

The music fitted the words outrageously, and the mocking insolence of
those six ‘Ah’s,’ each accented, at the end of every stanza, was
ineffable (_do, mi, re; si, re, do_). They were so utterly final--a
funeral march for rhetoric.

For obvious reasons there was all too little of this spirit awake during
the war; now, since the war, it blows freely through the air and is one
of the healthiest results of disillusionment. It makes men read their
newspapers sceptically and glance back to see where a dispatch came from
before accepting it as truth; it causes them to look with an ironic eye
on politicians, governments, philanthropists, institutions of learning,
and all other institutions, on everything and every one professionally
noble; it supplies readers for such irreverent publications as the
_American Mercury_, and makes satirical novels, like _Babbitt_, actually
popular. It reveals the grosser forms of credulity as precisely that.
Held to be something dreadful, the Ku Klux Klan would wax in strength,
but people find it ridiculous; it is doomed. Even before the ‘Protocols’
were exposed as forgeries an amazingly large number of people were
unable to swallow them; they were too silly. The _Saturday Evening
Post_, the _Red Book_ and the others go on their tawdrily romantic way,
but I doubt extremely that the millions who read the stories they
contain accept these as anything save sheer senseless relaxation, since
the same millions read and take to their hearts the comic strips--_Mr.
and Mrs._, _The Gumps_, etc.--which are so sordid, so blowzy, so
disillusioned, in both drawing and captions, as to make _Babbitt_ appear
by comparison a lilting romance and Mr. H. L. Mencken a blood-brother of
Mr. Harold Bell Wright. In short, though it is still possible to ‘get
away with’ a good deal of nonsense, it is not possible, even in America,
the most sentimental nation under the sun, to ‘get away with’ anywhere
near as much as once upon a time.

But there is more behind all this than a mere spirit of sceptical
mockery; clean and salty as it is, that spirit is only a part of
something bigger. The truth is, I think, that people have grown up--part
way up, at least. The incredible childishness of a decade ago is gone--I
trust, forever. It is not only that we accept less than before, but that
we are more level-headed both in accepting and rejecting. A questioning
coolness is abroad. Perhaps we expect less of life; certainly we are
less enthusiastic over it. That crass optimism about everything, not
openly to share which used to make an American taboo, no longer soars
and screams. It still lives, but with a broken wing, fluttering clumsily
like a hen. A good thing! There was nothing noble in it. At bottom it
represented only a desire not to be troubled, and was popular for the
same reason that the man is popular who, in response to an inquiry as to
his health, grins and shouts: ‘Fine! Fine! Never better!’

What a load of sentimentality has gone overboard with our
illusions!--sentimental notions about happiness, about country, about
life, about love. That amazing convicton, for example, that the only
thing of real importance in a woman was her chastity. Overboard. Drowned
a mile deep, as it deserved to be for the cheap and insulting notion it
was. In its long day it must have righteously infuriated thousands of
women--possibly more those who happened to be chaste than those who
happened not to be. Its loss signifies not more accent on the
sex-relation, but less, helping to put the relation where it belongs, as
merely one of a number of facts. An immense step has been taken toward
an honester, decenter understanding between men and women. And a score
of other sentimental notions are gone, too, or tottering. The
visualizing of the United States as a benevolent disinterested Uncle
Sam, a bit homely, a bit awkward, but strong and infinitely kind, like
the hero of a Cape Cod melodrama; and of France as a Jeanne d’Arc in
glittering armour, eyes shining, face aglow, shedding her life-blood for
Liberty--hum ...! Mr. E. M. Forster has recently written a very
remarkable novel in which he punctures, dispassionately, but once for
all, the Kipling legend of the English in India as public school
demi-gods; yet in both England and America the book has sold by tens of
thousands and met with almost unanimous praise.

Quite possibly a little that was fine and true has gone overboard with
the rubbish, but most of the destruction was salutary. And it has
served, it seems to me, to bring those two classes, the dumb majority
and the articulate minority, closer together than ever before. In a
sense it is not a real closeness; for, as I have said, the two can never
touch, one living among facts, the other in a picture of facts. But at
least the picture now bears some relation to the facts, is by way of
becoming what it must become to be of any value--an interpretation of
them. This, surely, is something to the credit of our disillusioned
period.

It is a puzzling period to study, and would still be so, I think, even
were we not in the midst of it. It questions everything, all once
accepted premises. Yet it is not like other great periods of change--the
Reformation or the Romantic Revival, for instance. They were, in one way
or another, periods of revolution, when men brushed aside the past, sure
that they had found something better--sure because they felt young and
fresh. The present period is not young and fresh; it is very, very
tired. And so, despite the obvious and extensive social changes that it
has already witnessed, it is not in spirit revolutionary. It questions
everything--governments, nationality, economics, religion, human nature,
life itself--but it is not young enough or fresh enough to discard
recklessly. People question and wonder, yet vote overwhelmingly for the
Republicans in America and the Conservatives in England.

Phenomena such as these and others more distressing are frequently
cited as evidence that ours is a period of discouraging reaction. I do
not agree. The bitter intolerance displayed by such movements as
Fascismo--or, for that matter, Fundamentalism--is, to my thinking, a
good sign, rather than a bad. It means that violent intolerance is
to-day forced back where it belongs--to the outskirts, to the extreme
Right or the extreme Left. It is violent and domineering because it
dares not be otherwise; it represents only an inconsiderable fraction of
the whole, and is afraid. At the moment when I write this, Fascismo
still governs Italy, but it has against it probably eighty per cent. of
the population, and governs by force alone, suppressing its most
dangerous enemies, muzzling the press, forbidding political gatherings,
dissolving societies, outraging the constitutional rights of
individuals. Such tyranny signifies fear--fear based on the certain
knowledge of the Fascisti that they and their policies do not represent
the country.

Yet people have not risen up _en masse_ and turned them out. No, and
this, too, is characteristic of the period. It lacks the ardent juvenile
faith in Utopias essential to drive multitudes to action. Instead,
people ask coolly: ‘What have you got, to put in place of what we so
unsatisfactorily have?’ But it is also a rather mature, almost wise
period, saying: ‘Let the Fascisti rave. Whom the Gods would destroy....’

The Republicans and the Conservatives must watch their step closely. In
neither case was the large majority obtained a loving endorsement. A
tired period but an extremely clear-eyed one, as periods go, with less
belief than usual in miraculous panaceas, but with still less in all
things being for the best. It is not a romantic period, though it is
full of superficially romantic events; there is no youth in it and small
enthusiasm. But it is a period out of which more of permanent value may
come than if it were.




SOPHISTICATION


My text is from Michael Arlen’s _The Green Hat_ (iv. i. 116) and from
Ford Madox Ford’s _Some Do Not ..._ (II. i. 196; ii. i. 215).

     _Lady Pynte liked young men to be Healthy and Normal; Mrs. Ammon
     preferred them to be Original. Lady Pynte liked Boys to be Boys;
     Mrs. Ammon didn’t mind if they were girls so long as they were
     Original. Lady Pynte insisted on Working For the Welfare of the
     People at Large and Not just for Our Own Little Class, she played
     bridge with a bantering tongue and a Borgia heart, she maintained
     that the best place to buy shoes was Fortnum and Mason’s, and if
     she saw you innocently taking the air of a sunny morning she would
     say: ‘You are not looking at all well, my good young man. Why don’t
     you take some Clean, Healthy exercise? You ought to be Riding.’
     That was why one maintained a defensive alliance with one’s haddock
     rather than do the manly thing and dance with Lady Pynte. She would
     say one ought to be riding, and for four years I had hidden from
     Lady Pynte the fact that I did not know how to ride. I simply did
     not dare to confess to Lady Pynte that I could not ride. I had
     already tried to pave the way to that dénouement by confessing that
     I came from the lower classes, but she did not appear to think that
     any class could be so Low as that._

            *       *       *       *       *

     _Being near Tietjens she lifted her plate, which contained two cold
     cutlets in aspic and several leaves of salad; she wavered a little
     to one side and, with a circular motion of her hand, let the whole
     contents fly at Tietjens’ head. She placed the plate on the table
     and drifted slowly towards the immense mirror over the fireplace._

     _‘I’m bored,’ she said. ‘Bored! Bored!’_

            *       *       *       *       *

     _‘If,’ Sylvia went on with her denunciation, ‘you had once in our
     lives said to me: “You whore! You bitch! You killed my mother. May
     you rot in hell for it” ... you might have done something to bring
     us together.’_

     _Tietjens said:_

     _‘That’s, of course, true.’_

And my subject is--what else with such a text?--Sophistication.

Not sophistication in the original unencrusted meaning of the word, but
in the overlaid current understanding of it--an emotional rather than an
intellectual condition. It is a condition very hard to define, since it
is emotional, yet sufficiently easy to recognize--and admire. To be
sophisticated you must be _blasé_; you must be witty; you must not take
anything, especially vice, very hard; you must be gay and casual about
problems that unsophisticated people are earnest about, though you may
(here you are reaching rarefied heights of sophistication) be as earnest
as you like about things that average people consider trivial. You must
show familiarity with the world of High Society, but also amused
disdain for it; you must know, and prove that you know, everything about
ordering a dinner in such places as Ciro’s (Monte Carlo), the Ritz
(Paris), and the Café de Paris (Biarritz). You should also be able to
let fall--now and then, very carelessly, merely because you cannot at
the moment think of the English word--a French or an Italian or even a
German word or phrase; but it is not excessively important that you
should do this correctly or even appropriately; the effect will be the
same anyway. Among contemporary writers Carl Van Vechten and Ronald
Firbank are sophisticated; and so is Michael Arlen, and so is Ford Madox
Ford (_né_ Hueffer).

There is one small drawback to sophistication: it is impossible without
an audience. One cannot pleasurably, perhaps not possibly, be
sophisticated all alone by oneself. One cannot think of a man getting
into an unshared bed as sophisticated--I mean to say, of course, after
his valet has left him. Fiction is full of people marooned on desert
islands; but only one writer, M. Jean Giraudoux, has ever thought of
thus marooning a sophisticated character. It was a delicious and
fantastic idea, which made _Suzanne et le Pacifique_ an irresistibly
funny book.

This disadvantage, however, is not grave, since sophisticated people are
rarely alone, even at night, and in public are sure of an admiring
audience. We all admire sophistication in real life, and we admire it
still more in novels. This is partly because it is never quite so
perfect and finished in the former as in the latter, but chiefly because
there is a touch of envy in our admiration for sophistication in life,
whereas we share flatteringly in that displayed in a novel. We, too,
love Iris Storm fastidiously and consider Sylvia Tietjens’ complicated
vices with tolerant weariness. We, too, are of the _haut monde_ and are
very offhand about it. We, too, have lived very, very hard and exhausted
everything and have come to look with a mellow amusement on all
intensities. It is delightful.

Unluckily for me, I do not know any sophisticated people in real life. I
have jealously seen them about, in restaurants and places, but I do not
know them--or perhaps I should say that they do not know me. But I know
sophistication in novels, none better. The sophisticated novelist must
be very sophisticated indeed to satisfy my fine trained taste. Any
momentary lapse into ingenuousness, and I am on him like a wolf. Thus,
among the writers I have mentioned, and among others whom I have not, I
salute most especially Mr. Michael Arlen; and this because, more
perfectly than the others, he knows how a sophisticated novel should be
written: to wit, in a _baroque_ and decorative prose. Mr. Firbank and
Mr. Van Vechten may also know this; but they lag far behind Mr. Arlen in
turning their knowledge into achievement. They do not discover such
felicities as: ‘ ... and over the breast of her dark dress five small
red elephants were marching towards an unknown destination’; or, ‘The
stormy brittle sunlight, eager to play with the pearls and diamonds of
Van Cleef, Lacloche and Cartier, aye, and of Tecla also, chided away the
fat white clouds, and now the sun would play with one window of the Rue
de la Paix, now with another, mortifying one, teasing another, but all
in a very handsome way.’ There you have the authentic manner for
sophisticated prose.

The reason why the authentic manner is _baroque_, even _rococo_, heavily
encrusted with ornament, is a melancholy reason. (‘That was a gloomy
reason,’ Mr. Arlen would say). It is that there is a certain lack of
body in sophistication. To eschew the passions--or perhaps not to eschew
them, but to smile at them--to be polished, suave and unobtrusively
superior, is delightful, but limits one a bit. Emerson’s assertion that
the exclusive man excludes no one but himself is doubtless an
exaggeration; but it is certainly true that the exclusive man does also
exclude himself. The technique of sophistication in literature is even
more exacting than the technique of the drama. Let no one fancy it easy
to write sophisticatedly. It is extremely difficult. A considerable
proportion of the writers in two continents is attempting it; yet one
can count the successes on the fingers of two hands. There is no
mistaking the genuine article in sophistication, for the very simple
reason that the false is always ludicrous, sometimes violently so,
sometimes faintly. English, French and American bookshops, and once a
week the _Saturday Evening Post_, are half full of hilarious attempts at
sophistication. It would be a mistake to deplore them; they add to the
gaiety of nations. If you care for clear laughter with no malice beneath
it, and must give up one book or the other, which would you sacrifice,
_Alice in Wonderland_ or _The Rosary_?

Sophistication in literature, then, as (I presume) sophistication in
real life, is immensely difficult of attainment; it demands a special
skillful technique, a wary sense of humour and a narrow selection of
material. Therefore, as I have already suggested, its manner becomes of
great importance. To avoid a lurking sense of impoverishment you must be
provided with decorative flowers to pluck by the wayside. The
luxuriously appointed cruise around the world on the _Arabic_ (22,000
tons) is not enough; you need those side-excursions to Capri, the
Balearic Islands and the foot-hills of Java. Once again I salute Mr.
Michael Arlen. His is _the_ manner. One can be sophisticated without
it--Mr. Ford is, and M. Paul Morand--but how much better to have it!

Let us turn now to the two novels from which I have taken, almost at
random, my text. The novels themselves I selected with considerable
care; for, while their sophisticated qualities of course overlap, there
are certain examples of sophistication in _The Green Hat_ that are
wanting in _Some Do Not ..._ and a few in the latter book that one will
not find in the former. Moreover, the two books are done in very
different manners.

What, except any one of a score of others from the same book, could give
a more admirable condensed example of sophistication than the passage I
have quoted from _The Green Hat_? The narrator introduces you to two
ladies--for no reason at all except your amusement and his own. One lady
has a title, the other has not. Excellent! He--I have to call him ‘he’
because I do not remember that his name is once mentioned in the
book--pokes good-humoured fun at both, but more especially at the one
with a title, and then goes on innocently (_innocently!_) to reveal the
fact that he comes from the lower classes and does not know how to ride.
You will go far to find a rarer expression of sophistication. For--do
you not see?--the narrator, at his ease in the homes of the great, is
smiling at class, is actually smiling at riding. This is, by consummate
inversion, raising snobbishness to a fine art. And all in such high
spirits.

You do not get the high spirits in the two passages I have quoted from a
rather long marital conversation in _Some Do Not ..._ (you will look for
them in vain in that novel); but you are given a very pretty example of
sophistication nevertheless. Sylvia Tietjens is of a most awfully good
family, and her husband of an even better one. People in society are
not, by plebeians, supposed to throw things at one another. Sylvia does
throw something--a plate of food--at her husband. Good! Moreover, it
hits him. But observe! He does not upset the dining-room table and hit
her back. He remains perfectly calm. And as for Sylvia, she drifts
slowly towards the enormous mirror over the fireplace (good touch,
that!) and remarks that she is bored! bored! Here, too, you are high in
the scale of sophistication. For it is obvious that to commit a breach
of manners, to do something that simply is not done, and then only to
feel bored, is far more sophisticated than to break one of the ten
commandments, usually the seventh, in the same spirit. Also I call your
attention in passing to the contents of the plate that Sylvia threw--two
cold cutlets in aspic and a few leaves of salad. At once elegant and
efficient.

The second passage, too, is admirable. The words ‘bitch’ and ‘whore’ are
not popularly supposed to be addressed by a gentleman to his wife; nor
is the wish that she may rot in hell. Yet when Sylvia suggests to her
husband that, to ensure their mutual happiness, he ought to have
addressed her in this manner, he says reasonably: ‘That’s, of course,
true.’ Which is all the more to his credit in that for twenty pages his
uniform has been dripping with oil from the salad that hit his shoulder.

Here, too, you perceive, you get inversion. These characters outrage,
and thereby show themselves above, the conventions. They always react to
stimuli in the opposite way from which average people react. They are
violent when we should expect them to be well-bred, and serene when we
expect them to be violent. Another example: to ingenuous people the
disease called syphilis is a shameful thing, to be considered with
horror and never to be mentioned aloud; to average people it is an
aesthetically disgusting malady and therefore not an available subject
for conversation. But the characters in sophisticated novels talk about
syphilis as carelessly as though they were talking of a family-tree.

But is there not in this, you may by now inquire, just a little
monotony? Once the trick is apparent, is it not almost as wearisome to
watch a man invariably do the unexpected thing as to watch him do the
expected? There is. Oh, it is! It is more wearisome. Because when the
expected thing is done for any reason more emotional than mere habit it
is significant of something other than individual dullness; it has roots
that penetrate down into the dark earthy past of a whole race. Whereas
to do invariably the unexpected thing, in order to show oneself superior
and startle an audience, is significant of nothing at all; beneath such
behaviour is emptiness.

Emptiness, indeed, yawns beneath the literature of sophistication. There
is no probing of truth below the glitter. There cannot be, since the
glitter is achieved through a superior disregard for truth. One would
not mind this if the literature of sophistication set out only to be
elegant amusing nonsense. (And I ought, in justice, to say here that if
Mr. Ronald Firbank were somewhat more amusing, his contribution to such
literature might fulfil that requirement). But too often it pretends to
be investigating truth. And this pretence, even though in some cases it
signify only a crowning sophisticated inversion, is impertinent and
annoying.

_The Green Hat_ lies open before me at the page of press comments which
the publisher has seen fit to append. I read: ‘_The Green Hat_ is the
novel of the year.’ ... ‘The most memorable novel I have read during the
past year.’ ... ‘I call it the finest novel of the last five years.’ ...
‘Heavens! what a lot that man knows about men and women--especially
women.’

If after this broadside one feels slightly giddy one should not hold it
against Mr. Arlen, who of course is not responsible and who distinctly
calls _The Green Hat_ a romance; but one would have thought that even
reviewers might have had a little more insight than this into what they
had pleasurably read.

For, leaving on one side the delightful manner of the book, consider the
material of which it is cleverly built. What and whom have we got here?
The identical material of those interminable melodramas which the French
(probably in an impotent attack on the tyrants of their national life)
call ‘literature for concierges,’ and which in England was dear to the
hearts of Ouida’s public. A glossy world of high society; some one (just
as in _Under Two Flags_, and in how many other long-forgotten romances)
assuming, for quite inadequate reasons, some one else’s sin and
suffering bravely as an outcast until a third person blurts out the
truth (the original touch being that in _The Green Hat_ the victim is
the heroine instead of the hero, that she suffers from a husband’s
syphilis instead of from a brother’s embezzlement, and that she dies at
the end of the book); the cruel father separating youthful lovers who
never, never forget one another (though, for the sake of modernity,
during their separation the heroine, not the hero, leads a scandalous
life--which, mind you, is never described, since its reality would have
been squalid) and come together at last, when, in a final triumphant
burst of renunciation, the heroine surrenders her lover to his wife and
commits suicide. Sheer melodrama, as false, as quite properly false, as
_Scènes de la Vie de Bohème_ or _Scaramouche_--precisely that sort of
thing, in fact. And the characters: can you _see_ Hilary, or Guy, or
Napier, or Venice? Have they three dimensions? Can you walk around them?
Of course not. You’re not (I give Mr. Arlen credit for intending)
supposed to be able to. And Iris, the radiant, the well-beloved, what is
Iris? What but a very young man’s dream of a woman--experience plus
innocence, a prostitute with the soul of a virgin? Go back a generation
and you will find her in Mr. Le Gallienne’s _The Quest of the Golden
Girl_.

Well and good. I have no objection to any of this. I enjoyed the book
immensely. But, please, let us not take it for something else than it
is.

I know almost nothing about Mr. Arlen, I have never even seen his
photograph; yet I feel a pleasant personal liking for him. He provided
me with an amusing book couched in a delightful style; and I do not for
a moment believe that he himself takes it more earnestly than I do or
considers it anything other than an agreeably up-to-date fairy-tale. If
I have pointed out that the material of which it is constructed appears
to me melodrama, not drama, sentimentality, not sentiment, artifice, not
life, it is only because I wished to express my opinion that this is
true of all the literature of sophistication, which--not here, but
elsewhere--frequently presents itself as something more significant.

A reading of _Some Do Not ..._ does not leave me with a similar
affection for its author. I cannot escape the feeling that Mr. Ford
takes that book hard! hard! and that in it he set out to write a
masterpiece.

To begin with, there is the style. We have often been told that Mr. Ford
is a master of style; and so, in truth, he is. But of what use is style
all alone by itself? The style of _Some Do Not ..._ is the grand style,
simple, sonorous, purged of affectation, well suited to such a novel as
_War and Peace_; but it is not the right style for _Some Do Not_....
Indeed, in my opinion, no style is the right style for that novel. _Some
Do Not ..._ has for me all the defects of the literature of
sophistication, with none of its virtues. It is false and pretends to be
true; it is artificial without being witty; it is romance without
glamour; it is essentially literary; it is without any more sense of
humour than that required to keep it from becoming ridiculous; it has
not a touch of spontaneity; it is as dreary as it is well done.

In a negative way the thing is perfect--ever and ever so careful. Mr.
Ford introduces an incredible Irish priest by saying that he ‘had a
brogue such as is seldom heard outside old-fashioned English novels of
Irish life’--thereby protecting himself from the start; he would have
been incapable of writing ‘across the _breast_ of her dark _dress_’; and
it goes without saying that in his creditably meagre use of foreign
words he adopts none of the original spellings that star Mr. Arlen’s
romance (_aristocracie_, _giggolo_, and the like). Mr. Ford’s prose is
compact, sober, and restrained. But, since this is true, it becomes the
more important to discover what it is all about.

I am unable at present to obtain a copy of _If Winter Comes_ (one of the
advantages that I neglected to chronicle in the essay on Living Abroad);
but I am struck by the similarity between the plot of Mr. Hutchinson’s
novel, as I remember it, and that of _Some Do Not ..._ Mark
Something-or-Other was a man whom the world in general regarded with
indifference as a failure, and for whose excellent work somebody else
was always getting the credit, but whom a few really fine spirits
reverenced. So was Christopher Tietjens. Each was unhappily married,
though (_If Winter Comes_ not being a sophisticated novel) Mark’s wife
was merely stodgy and insensitive to her husband’s whimsical sweetness
(bless her heart! she had all my sympathy), while Christopher’s Sylvia
was--oh, dear me! Each hero loved another lady, really appreciative and
good, who was eager to sacrifice, in Mark’s case her husband
(unappreciative devil _he_ was, too!), in Christopher’s her virginity.
Each hero refused the gift. (‘Some do not’ ... do that kind of thing).
In neither case did the hero’s wife--or any one else except those few
fine spirits--believe in the refusal. Each, instead of getting himself
profitably _embusqué_, slipped off unassumingly to the war and was badly
hurt. Each slipped back home again to take up modestly and wearily the
old round--a good deal hampered in this by all those _embusqués_ who had
pushed ahead in the meantime. Each, for no obvious reason, became a
social pariah, was slandered and fairly hounded by the world in
general--but not, of course, in the sophisticated novel, to the point of
general hysterics reached in _If Winter Comes_. The endings, naturally,
are different. Mark’s wife divorces him, the other lady’s husband is
conveniently killed in France, and the lovers are felicitously united;
Christopher Tietjens’ wife does not divorce him, he will not become
Valentine’s clandestine lover, and he slips off again, even more
unassumingly than before, to the war--presumably to be killed.

Here, as unmistakably as in _The Green Hat_, we have the artificial
stuff of melodrama. Hardly, since Richardson’s _Pamela_, has such
feverish importance as in _Some Do Not ..._ been attached to the
question of whether a man and a woman will or will not have sexual
relations. The last two hundred pages of the book are virtually devoted
to this problem, and to its answer--‘Some do not.’ Personally, I didn’t
care in the least. Let them, if they wanted to, or not, only, for
heaven’s sake, let them and every one else stop talking about it! What
possible difference could it make to me?

I am aware that I have written about Mr. Ford’s novel in an
insufficiently cool manner; but the truth is (as you may have guessed)
that the book exasperates me. All this cheap sensationalism masquerading
as a serious study of life! _If Winter Comes_ was atrocious, but it was
too silly to be excessively annoying. By the time one reached the
piled-up anguish of the court-room scene one was in the best of spirits.
But _Some Do Not ..._ is too carefully done to be silly. Its material is
that of any ten-twenty-thirty melodrama; but its style is that of
_Madame Bovary_. It arouses the same distaste as in the fairy-tale the
vulgar servant wench who had dressed herself up as the princess.

Even so, I have perhaps not accounted adequately for my conviction that
_Some Do Not ..._ is fundamentally false. The stuff of melodrama
sometimes is the stuff of life, as it is sufficient to read the daily
press to discover; and occasionally a great genius builds up truth out
of just such material. He does this, of course, by creating real
characters. Once a character comes alive, the most improbable things
may happen to him, and no one cares--or doubts them. But Mr. Ford is not
a genius, and his characters are not real. He describes them neatly and
pungently; he even visualises them for us, until they stand out as
sharply as the waxwork figures at Madame Tussaud’s. But that is the end
of it. They will not come to life. And even if Mr. Ford were the genius
that he is not, they could not come to life in that stifling atmosphere
of sophistication, where effect is everything and one eye is always on
an audience. But then, if Mr. Ford were a genius he would not give us
that atmosphere; he would have something too important to say to trouble
with anything so small, superficial and glittering as sophistication.

The truth about the literature of sophistication is, I think, that,
since it is at bottom a form of showing off, it can have no dealings
with truth. In his choice of material the sophisticated writer selects
what is false--not, like that occasional genius, for some other reason
than its falsity, or for no reason at all, but precisely because it is
false, and therefore sure of an easy effect. There is tawdriness in
this, of course. I wonder whether there is not a trace of still another
quality. Children especially delight in showing off. Can it be that
there is something a little ingenuous in sophistication?




MEDITATIONS ABOUT WOMEN


It is doubtless wrong for any except the very young to make
generalizations, because nobody else believes in them--least of all in
the ones he himself makes. But it is great fun, and, paradoxically, the
fun increases in direct proportion to the maker’s disbelief, I suppose
because his generalizations thus tend more and more to become
light-hearted taunts flung, dustwise, in the face of a chaotic universe.
Byron enjoyed defying God, which indicated that he had a God to defy;
your modern sceptic thumbs his nose at emptiness, which is at least as
brave of him. And of all generalizations that such a man can make those
about women are the most entertaining to him. For, having by his time of
life discovered that, save for a small matter of physical formation,
women are almost precisely like men, it becomes for him the more amusing
to unearth or invent differences explaining that ‘almost,’ and to
magnify them and build them up into something artistic that would be a
beautiful explanation of life--if life were only like that. Thus, I do
not believe in any of the generalizations that follow, but I think it
would be quite pleasant if they were true.


_Why do Men generalize especially about Women?_

But that is so simple. Because of their overweening vanity that will not
allow them to admit that a subject on which they spend ninetenths of
their thoughts can in itself be other than a rich subject full of
mystery and significance. Having briefly settled this, I now go on to my
own instructive considerations on women, which begin with an inquiry
into


_Their Untruthfulness._

Men are to be found who frequently tell the truth on principle, and
those are quite common who habitually tell the truth because, though
they would prefer to lie when lying would be advantageous, something
prevents them from doing so, they stammer, grow red, and are forced back
on truth in spite of themselves. Women only tell the truth when lying is
unprofitable, and never on principle. This is because women have not got
principles. Men, not they, are idealists; they only pretend to be
idealists in eras when that is what men want them to be. They live among
facts, and are bored or amused by abstractions, the making of which they
tolerantly consider only one more of the childish games, like curling or
pinochle, men delight to play at; which, indeed, it is. Men generalize
incessantly about women, but women do not generalize about men. They
take men individually as they come--if they do. Also they never
experience any difficulty in telling a lie; on the contrary, they look
more candid then than at other times. This is, again, because they do
not see why truth should be any more important than falsehood, because
almost their chief preoccupation is to keep men quiet and happy, and
because they believe in doing everything as well as it can be done.


_Their Courage._

Every one says that women are braver than men, and perhaps they are, but
this is due to their lack of imagination. Suffering to them means simply
suffering, whereas to men it means suffering plus the agonized
preliminary picture of suffering. A dentist, in whose clutches a woman
is notoriously brave, a man a shuddering coward, does not really hurt
one a tenth as much as a man beforehand fancies he is going to hurt and
at the moment fancies he is hurting. Too much awe is felt (by men) for
what women go through at child-birth. Child-bearing is doubtless
unpleasant for a woman, but it is infinitely worse for her husband, who
sits in an atrocious hospital parlour and conjures up horrors. Women can
have six children in six successive years and suffer detriment only to
their figure; after the same experience their husbands are grey-haired
tottering wrecks.

But let us be thorough. Let us make no assertion about women that we do
not investigate. I have mentioned and therefore must consider


_Their Lack of Imagination._

This is akin to their inaptitude for abstractions, but, whereas they
despise abstractions, they admire imagination and would like to possess
it. But they do not possess it. A woman can readily take a fact and,
with her gift of untruthfulness, develop it into another different fact
or even into a firework-shower of facts; she cannot, as occasionally a
man can do, place it and other facts together and build a cathedral.
Women are far better observers than men, but they are never first-rate
creative artists, hardly creative artists at all, either in cooking or
in dressmaking, in painting or in literature, and (with the exception of
Emily Brontë, who was a miracle) those who have come closest to being so
were very mannish women. George Sand wore trousers, and Lewes’s
unprintable physiological remark about George Eliot is well known. The
excuse women give for this--that they have always been held back by men
and have only recently begun to come into their own--is, and they know
it to be, absurd. Women, at least in western countries, have always done
whatever they wished with men. For two centuries they directed the
political conduct and even the wars of the leading nation in Europe--and
a pretty mess they made of it.

I repeat: women can report but not create. A man’s best work in art is
almost always based on what he has imagined rather than experienced
(witness, among the great and the near-great, Tolstoy and Stephen
Crane); a woman’s, never. Women, since they have a love of facts and an
appreciation of form, make quite creditable artists when they stick to
what they have observed; when they essay to do more than this they fall
heavily to earth. Thus, when Miss Willa Cather confines herself to
describing that section of America which she knows at first-hand, we
read her with interest; when, in the last part of _One of Ours_, she
attempts to throw herself imaginatively into something she has not
experienced, the result is so poor and false as to be not ludicrous but
painful; the reader actually blushes. Miss Katherine Mansfield, Miss
Dorothy Richardson, Miss Stella Benson, Mrs. Edith Wharton, all observe
acutely--and do nothing more, and all are quite creditable artists. It
is not very important to be a quite creditable artist.

On the other hand, one could almost wish that all critics of literature
were women. The criticisms of even stupid women are worth attention,
while those of intelligent women are admirable and suggestive. They have
a way of going directly to the heart of the matter. Their preoccupation
with facts makes them unerring judges of the truth or falsity of a
situation, and their wistful respect for imagination makes them at once
aware of even its shadowy presence. Nowhere do they display more clearly
than in the criticism of a book


_Their Intuition._

Much nonsense has been written about this by men, who have chosen to
consider it something miraculous, outside the laws of nature. It is, of
course, nothing of the sort and would not be half so interesting if it
were. The gift of intuition is merely the ability to think so swiftly
that one’s thought barely grazes the intermediate steps in the process
and appears to an outsider, and often even to oneself, to leap
immediately from the initial fact to the final conclusion. Far from
being contrary to logic, intuition is the most perfect example of logic.
The flying thought must keep straight as an arrow to its course,
disregarding instantly all irrelevancies. And the fact that women
probably do possess the gift more commonly than men is the clearest
disproof of the silly accusation that they are illogical. They are, it
is true, illogical in argument, but that is because they do not care for
or respect argument for its own sake (another silly game) but only as a
practical means to an end, so that when it is going against them they
shift their ground shamelessly and thereby infuriate or delight their
masculine antagonists according to the latter’s emotional attitude
toward them.

There are several excellent reasons why women should be more intuitive
than men. One is that they are not led astray by imagination or fancy,
another that they are more pragmatic, a third that those occupying
so-called subordinate business positions (such as stenographers, among
whom intuition is amazingly common) have better trained minds than their
employers. It is largely a matter of concentration.


_Their Morals._

This is a delicate subject that I would avoid but for its extreme
importance.

Men are essentially moral beings. That is, when they behave badly, as
they generally do, they always feel that this is not the way to
behave--in short, that there _is_ a way to behave. Women have no such
conviction. A great number of them, possibly a majority, always behave
‘well’ because they have been trained to do so and have never
experienced an emotion strong enough to compel them to break the habit,
but there is no personally felt principle behind such virtue.
Accordingly, they are at heart neither moral nor immoral, but a-moral.
Husbands certainly ‘deceive’ their wives more frequently than wives
their husbands, because a man’s opportunities are greater, his risk of
detection is smaller, and his punishment, when he is detected, less, but
an erring husband has always a sense of guilt that is absent from an
erring wife. Marauding lovers themselves are often shocked by their
mistresses’ insouciance and total lack of remorse. They would have a
woman do wrong for their sake, but they would also have her conscious of
wrong-doing. Perhaps this ridiculous desire is in part due to men’s
vanity, which would have the sacrifice made for their sake as great as
possible. In any case, the desire is disappointed. The one sacrifice
that women do not make for men is a moral sacrifice. They have heard
much talk about evil, just as a person born deaf may have read much
about music, but they have no more real understanding of evil than he
has of music. A wicked act is simply one which the doer feels to be
wicked. Accordingly, women can, and often do, pass unscathed, unstained
and fresh through experiences that would brand men’s faces as evil.


_A Reservation._

It will by this time have become clear that when I write of women I do
not usually mean the great sheep-like multitude of women who live their
lives through more or less according to the rules taught them in
childhood, but cultivated civilized women. This I feel to be not only
justifiable but essential. How would it be possible to write of the
capacities of women, and then spend one’s time on those in whom such
capacities remain latent and unrealized? Not Babbitt but Roosevelt is
called the typical American, because in Roosevelt, however rare an
example he may have been, one perceives the complete development of
characteristics that are innate, but remain undeveloped, in most
Americans.

However, it is necessary to bear this reservation (if you can call it
that) in mind when reflecting on the foregoing section of this essay;
otherwise the reader might be puzzled by the seemingly contradictory
existence of numerous noisy ladies engaged in combating Vice. Let them
go. Poor things, they are rotten with complexes! thwarted souls, chafing
(even though they do not know it) over their own inability to expand,
and hating the whole world for their discomfort, as a child hates the
table against which he has bumped his head! An excellent subject for a
novel, they must be summarily dismissed from a brief essay.


_Their Fastidiousness._

If women are not inhibited by moral law from what men deem wrong-doing,
they often are by their fastidiousness--namely, when wrong-doing is at
the same time gross and ugly (which is not nearly always the case). They
have a genuine and profound appreciation of fineness, suavity and
perfection. Neither is this, as men often assume, equivalent to the mere
love of luxury. An indigent girl yields to a wealthy Don Juan not
because he surrounds her with the comforts of riches but because he
surrounds her with smoothness. She obtains a quite different and much
finer satisfaction than he from his spacious silent motor car and from
the polished restaurants to which he takes her. There is something
hypnotic to her in the charm of elegance. The setting means a great deal
to women, far more than men recognize. For while it does not matter so
very much to them what they do, it matters tremendously how they do it.
In this love of perfect setting they are undoubtedly right and centuries
in advance of men. An act in itself--any act--is a bare and meagre
thing; done fittingly, at the proper time, in a perfectly right setting,
it draws upon the richness of a thousand seemly associations. Man’s
world is the barren childish world of an African savage; it is hard to
understand how women, who are civilized and grown-up, can endure it.


_Their Maturity._

It is banal to say that men never grow up, but one should not be afraid
to make a banal remark if it also happens to be true, and this, alas, is
true without qualification. Men are hopeless babies. Not only do they
delight in primitive things, but their whole attitude toward life is
immature and absurd. They expect a great deal from life, and are hurt
when they do not get it. You see them looking out at life with wide
pained eyes, in precisely the same way a child looks out of the window
at the rain that is spoiling his holiday.

Women expect a great deal less from life--once they have passed their
spoiled girlhood, when they expect to receive everything and give
nothing. They become disillusioned very early--as soon, in fact, as they
have recognized men’s essential blundering stupidity and weakness. How
else could it be with them, who know that they depend on men, yet know
what men are? How can a woman look up to some one who, instead, looks up
to her in the most infantile manner? The cave-man ideal is a very young
girl’s ideal; the cave-man at home must be as helpless a baby as any
other man. If a man has a canker on his tongue he fancies it a cancer;
if he has catarrh from over-smoking he fancies it tuberculosis; if some
little thing goes wrong with his house it appears to him an
international catastrophe. Respect creatures of this sort? Lean on them?
Broken reeds! Be kind to them, indulge them, pet them back into
equanimity, yes; lean on them, no.

However, the disillusionment induced by a perception of men’s sorry
nature is not sufficient to account for women’s mature attitude toward
life. Indeed, one would expect it to result in their becoming
embittered, soured, exasperated; whereas all civilized women are mellow,
amazingly tolerant and--oh, just grown-up! I think this is because they
do not start with ideals, see them go smash, and try wretchedly to build
up other ideals from the fragments; because they do not believe in
abstractions but only in facts. A man rejects the innumerable facts that
will not fit into his abstractions; a woman rejects no facts at all.
This makes her world far richer than his. And if it is not glorified,
neither is it falsified, by the radiance of an ideal. A woman, in short,
since she accepts everything, comes to know a vast deal more about life
than a man. At the same time she is calmer about it. She does not credit
this mass of material with any hidden meaning, and therefore does not
worry herself irascible by trying helplessly to find one. Some scraps of
the material are pleasant, some disagreeable, and it is all very
interesting, so the more of it the better--only there is nothing to get
excited about. I confess to admiring this attitude extremely.
Theoretically it may be less noble than the masculine attitude, but it
gets far better results, even on character, since it cultivates
kindliness, tolerance and sympathy, grown-up virtues rare to find among
idealists.

This matter (now, I trust, clear) of the respective youth and maturity
of the sexes reveals a number of gross popular misconceptions. For
example: a good many elderly women are attracted to young men, and all
elderly men are attracted to young girls (though some of them conceal
it). The former phenomenon is popularly considered ludicrous and
pathetic, the latter something satyr-like, disgusting and corrupt. As a
matter of fact, the two judgments should be reversed. There is, if just
as much, no more sensuality in an elderly man’s feeling for a young girl
than in a young man’s. He simply feels what he has always felt. He is
still the callow sentimentalist that he was at twenty; he has not grown
up. On the other hand, an elderly woman’s feeling for a young man is a
thrilling incestuous combination of sensuality and motherliness.


_The Unanswerable Riddle._

It has always pleased men, who are simply incorrigible, to find women
(of whom they are apt to speak as ‘woman’) mysterious. I once knew a man
who asserted that there was nothing more mysterious about women than
about men (and God knew there was nothing mysterious about them!) except
that every once in a while they went temporarily mad, at which moments
no sensible man would pay any attention to them, insanity being without
interest. There is something to be said for this simple estimate; still,
women do seem to me to have one profound secret of which no explanation
appears. Puzzled, I return to it again and again. How, in heaven’s
name, can they put up with men--and why do they?

They do not need to. By now, vast multitudes of women have demonstrated
that even in an economic world organized exclusively by men they can
hold their own with the latter, and they have stripped from the puerile
business of making money much of the silly hieratic pretence of
importance with which men surrounded it. Almost any competent
stenographer is dispassionately aware that she could run her employer’s
business quite as well as he runs it, frequently better. And yet women
continue to marry. Why do they? Any one who has tried both, knows that
it is far easier, as well as more agreeable, to go to a nice, clean,
quiet office for the day than to run a house, even with the supposed
assistance of a servant or two; while, as for having a home, a woman
could have one quite as well without a man, since she must make it in
any case.

There is no difficulty in understanding why a man marries. He gets a
great deal for his money--a home, a housekeeper, some smoothness, a
little fineness, the convenient inexpensive satisfaction of his sexual
desires, a kind mature companion to spoil him and protect him against
the harsh buffets of a world eternally different than he childishly and
sentimentally fancies it.

But a woman? What does she get in return for marriage? Nothing, so far
as I can see, save the satisfaction (at moments not of her choosing) of
_her_ sexual desires. Surely it cannot be for this alone that women
marry. That would be like buying a whole house for the sake of one
picture in it. In fact, in this matter women have, potentially, an
immense advantage over men. Men, the childish dreamers, will (everywhere
save in pure America) follow unknown attractive women about the streets
of a city for hours, murmuring compliments from time to time, hoping
against hope for some response. It is pathetic. But think of the field
that would be open to women if they chose to behave in this manner! Even
venal professionals are not without some success. The entire male sex
would be at the service of a really ‘nice’ woman; for who ever heard of
a man rejecting any woman’s advances, however indifferent he might be to
her? His vanity would not let him. A man can have only an inconsiderable
fraction of the women he desires; a woman could have any or all of the
men who pleased her--and with the minimum of effort. She could select a
lover at just the moment when she desired a lover. Equally, if she
desired a child she could select a promising father for the child, and,
supposing the combination not to work out so well as she hoped, could
next time select another. True, at present such behaviour might be
looked at askance by the most meticulous; but women could alter this
attitude to a sensible one at any time they pleased.

Instead, they elect to marry. Oscar Wilde was wrong to call ‘woman’ ‘a
sphinx without a secret.’ Women have their secret, and this is it.


_Ministering Angels._

Well, marry they do and will probably continue to do despite my advice.
It offers a field for useless but entertaining conjecture. Do they marry
because they like to try everything? Or because they are sorry for men?
Or because it requires more energy to repel a man’s repeated advances
than is worth devoting to anything, either good or bad? At any rate, one
thing is certain: unless they marry very, very young, it can hardly be
because they expect much of marriage. They cannot fail to know that they
must give a great deal and receive very little.

What they do give is amazing. It makes me feel almost as reverently
toward them as Charles Dickens in his emotional moments. They are so
very kind to men. They habitually smooth out all those difficulties,
such as servant troubles, baby troubles, household difficulties,
difficulties of the kitchen, which men fatuously call ‘the little
problems of existence,’ not seeing that they are gigantic as compared
with their own meagre business troubles. They are extraordinarily gentle
with their husbands in illness or even in fancied illness, rarely
showing any resentment at the impatience with which _they_ were treated
when _they_ were ill. They put up with a turbulence, grossness and lack
of all sense of what is seemly, that outrages their fastidiousness; they
put up with men’s bragging, with men’s vanity, with their ridiculous
assumption of gravity and importance (precisely like that of children
dressed up in their parents’ clothes). In company they listen to their
husbands relate the same, same, same jokes, and, instead of shrieking,
smile, as though that were the first time they, too, had heard those
jokes. They cajole and caress men out of infantile bad tempers, the
logical cure for which would be a spanking. Themselves liking to eat
little and delicately, they allow--nay, assist--men to eat much and
grossly, and they watch the creatures’ mood change, in the process, from
irascibility to mellow tenderness, and merely smile pleasantly, with
scarcely perceptible irony. Have I really said that they are not
artists? They are consummate artists to endeavour to work in such a
hostile medium, to work with such material. But, no, they are not
artists; for they do not do anything with the material, not really, not
anything permanent. Still, that is not their fault, either. No one
could, not even God.

Ah, well, it is not possible that women endure all this, do all this
(both so unnecessarily), out of altruism, sheer self-sacrifice. Earth is
not heaven. They must have some obscure, if probably simple, reason. In
the meantime men flourish and grow fat.




LEGEND


Under the influence of that gentle optimism which once upon a time
suffused the world with a warm twilight glow, I used to believe that in
the very long run truth would out, and that accordingly history was an
exact science. Conceding cheerfully that a veracious history of our own
period or of other periods close behind it was impossible, I yet took it
for granted that, given time enough, falsehoods and misconceptions would
be weeded out and documented objective truth established. This
condition, I assumed, had already been perfectly achieved in the history
of the various western nations up to about the period of the French
Revolution, which still lay in a sort of gradually clearing penumbra.

Now that the attractive twilight glow has given place to a bleak grey
light (whether or not of dawn I have no idea, but, if so, of a
singularly unpleasant November dawn), I have begun to question, among
other things, that comfortable belief. And, questioned, it seems to me
to reveal at once certain lacunae and incongruities that make it appear
extremely dubious and lead me to wonder that I ever accepted it so
unthinkingly.

For example, while, judging from the past, anything like a definitive
history of the late war will probably not be written for two hundred
years or so, from tendencies apparent even to-day it is already possible
to predict that such a history will deal with the struggle coolly as the
result of clear-cut national rivalries, largely economic. Thus history
has explained earlier wars, and thus it is, as yet gropingly, preparing
to explain this one.

Now any man who at maturity lived through the period from 1914 to 1918
must be aware that such an explanation, however fully documented, will
not be a complete and truthful explanation of the war. In retrospect the
war will seem, from its results, to have been an inevitable, coldly
logical affair; but the fact remains that it was not that, as we who
witnessed it know. To begin with, many hundreds of thousands of young
men went willingly into the war, though aware that they were going to
almost certain death. That is simply not done in behalf of an economic
conflict. A considerable proportion of those young men went to war
because they believed with all their heart that they were to fight for
an ideal. That final history will doubtless ignore their emotional
attitude. To-day, when it is not yet possible to ignore the attitude,
the tendency among interpreters of the war is to discount it as of no
importance, to brush all these dead thousands aside as deluded--mere
tools of the real forces that brought on the war. But unless one is to
adopt the absurd belief that economic laws, nationalistic rivalries and
so forth, are objective things with a life of their own, instead of what
they obviously are--expressions of the minds of men assembled in groups,
it is clear that if these thousands of young men were deluded they must
have been deluded by some person or group of persons.

But if one thing should be apparent by now to any one who lived through
those four trying years, it is that the war had no villain or villains
responsible for it. There were, indeed, fierce economic and other
rivalries between the groups of men called nations, but no one,
literally no one, intended or devised that catastrophe. The peoples
blundered into war. It was a vast, senseless, chaotic mêlée. History
may, and doubtless will, write it down as something clear and logical;
in truth it was neither one nor the other. People rather fortuitously
but none the less rigidly assembled in groups were at odds with people
assembled in other similar groups, about trade, world markets, the
congestion of population, and the like; but they were far less clearly
so than history is going to give them credit for being, and their being
so was only half the story. The other half was emotion. Neither, given
the bewilderment over the war, when it came, of positively every one
save the regular army officer (whose mind, if you can call it that, is
not subject to bewilderment), can I believe that within each
comprehensive national group smaller groups of people pulled strings
and, callously exploiting the majority, deliberately brought on the war
for their own advantage. The result may prove to be the same as though
they had done that, but they simply did not. They were as bewildered and
upset and emotional as the others. History, I begin to perceive, cares
really only for results--with, perhaps, neat, post-factum causes; and
that is why I grow sceptical of it, since a result without its
causes--all of them--is not truth and lacks significance.

Presumably, then (still judging by the past), what we are going to have
a couple of centuries hence is a cold, neat, logical, definitive history
of the World War, with, running along beside it, a body of literature
patriotically chronicling, exalting and deforming its episodes of
heroism. And never the twain shall meet, any more than East and West,
Highbrow and Lowbrow, mind and matter. And which of the two will be the
falser it is hard to say. The former will not explain truly why people
made the war, and the latter will _not_ tell what they truly felt. Each
will fail even in its own chosen province. A novel like _War and Peace_
may be written that will come amazingly close to the real truth, but the
historians will sniff at it because some of its facts are inaccurate and
because it is a novel, and the addicts of the patriotic literature will
detest and condemn it because it does not picture their ancestors as
heroes, but as bewildered mediocre individuals like themselves.

It is only of late that I have begun to distrust history, but this
patriotic literature I have, ever since I was old enough to think,
disliked and found depressing. Depressing because it is so sweet,
wide-eyed and simple, giving always somehow the effect of being written
in words of one syllable; because it attributes to the men whose deeds
it recounts the minds of children--not real children, at that; and
because it would reduce the obscurely motivated happenings of this rich,
confused, infinitely interesting world to the insipid level of a
Sunday-School story or a play by Schiller. However, it is not very
important. Despite its use of real names, people can hardly accept it as
real--that is, as in any way related to their own lives. And I should
not have devoted even a paragraph to it but for one thing that it does,
from which comes its only strength and in which lies its only danger.
This is: to attempt to exploit legend.

A legend, like a gigantic shadow with blurred edges, forms about every
man who has been of great importance in his day. For that matter, a
legend forms about every significant period in history, too. There is a
Greek legend and an Italian Renaissance legend, just as there is a
Socrates legend and a Leonardo legend. But the personal legend is the
less vague and the more important. When a man’s influence on his fellows
is impressive, and often when it is not, a legend grows up about him,
even during his lifetime. There was certainly a Roosevelt legend long
before Roosevelt’s death, and there is already a Coolidge legend to-day.
For the most part these legends eventually fade, flicker and go out
(there was even a Blaine legend once upon a time), but when a man’s
existence has modified that of millions and left an impress on events,
his legend grows and solidifies, rather than diminishes, as the years
pass. Until finally it becomes so strong that it alone has life; you
cannot possibly get at the vanished individual for the impenetrable
legend surrounding his memory.

‘Surrounding his memory’ is perfectly accurate; for the legend is not
equivalent to the memory. It is, indeed, something quite different, as
some of those who knew the dead hero intimately often struggle in vain
to show us. Yet in their struggle there is a kind of perplexity; even
these intimates become submerged by the legend, and get it all mixed up
with their personal memories, so strong it is. The best example of which
is to be found in the reminiscences of old men who actually knew
Lincoln, since rarely about any one so recently dead has a permanent
legend formed so compactly. It is as impossible to know what Lincoln
truly was as to know what Washington or Napoleon was. No amount of newly
unearthed documents can alter the legend or shake it.

For this is the strength of legend: that it is not thought, but feeling.
When I know a man well I do not think of him as having dark hair, a
straight nose, rather small eyes, and a stoop. His presence or the
mention of his name produces in me a certain sensation that, so far as I
am concerned, _is_ the man. My like or dislike for him, my opinion of
his character, may be affected by what others tell me about him; but
that sensation nothing can alter. It is of precisely the same kind as
the sensation given me by a certain odour or a certain melody. It is
unmistakable.

Something like this, legend gives. One says Lincoln, and a feeling, a
sensation, springs up in the mind.

This emotion, this legend, the patriotic Sunday-Schoolish brand of
literature attempts to exploit, and history attempts to ignore.

The former effort is, I have suggested, not without danger. (To what?
Oh, I suppose, to truth, to sanity of mind). It would employ a strong,
universally felt emotion for the purposes of a chronicle as falsely
innocent as a fairy-tale. One might compare the effect of such
exploitation to that of a moving-picture in colours. The colour values
are all wrong, not thus do grass and a red gown look in sunlight; but
there the grass actually is, waving, and through it in her false red
gown actually walks the heroine. It is confusing. Even so, I do not
think the danger very serious for any one with enough of a mind to be
worth saving. The point of all this twaddle, plausible as the stuff may
at first appear, is too naïve, too utterly unlike any conceivable
expression of the reader’s own psychology.

The deliberate and persistent attempt of history to ignore legend is
another and graver matter.

That the attempt should be made is perhaps natural. Legend is pure
feeling, and historians distrust feeling, noting contemptuously how
unfounded it usually is and how wide of the mark its conclusions more
often than not appear to them, whose business it is to examine facts.
Also, their minds being trained to weigh and measure, they are not
interested in anything that cannot be weighed and measured.

All the same, they are wrong. Whether or not legend is something we
should be better without, it exists. You cannot ignore something that
is. And legend exists as solidly as the Battle of Waterloo. You cannot
get through it or around it or behind it, and therefore you cannot
dismiss it.

I admit that if I were an historian I should probably want to. Not only
should I be disdainful (as I am, even without being an historian) of the
tawdry foundationless legends spawning all about me, with their cheap
slogans (‘Keep Cool with Cal!’), and apt to forget that the death-rate
among legends is higher than that among Jews in Poland, but I should
feel despairingly that to let oneself in for legend, to concede the
necessity of considering feeling, would make the writing of history an
enterprise too gigantic to be possible; and so, very likely, it is.

Nevertheless, history written, as it is, without knowledge and due
consideration of emotion begins to appear to me a colossal falsehood.
Men’s acts are three-fourths the product of emotions, and, no matter how
false the emotions may have been, without intimate acquaintance with
them you cannot rightly understand men’s behaviour. As for dismissing
legend, the attempt would be insolent if it were not so hopeless.
Legend has swayed more minds than has fact. Indeed, half the time it is
legend that produces facts. The Napoleonic legend has had a hundred
times more effect in shaping actual events than ever, for all his
greatness, had Napoleon himself (who, moreover, exploited his own legend
consummately). Dismiss it? ‘Wake Duncan with thy knocking!’

How legends arise would be a curious and fascinating study, very far
from being so simple as one may at first fancy, with his attention
focussed on the standardization of thought achieved by the daily press;
for legends sprang up equally, and endured, long before printing was
invented. But this is a side issue that the unfortunate historian may
leave to some one else. Legend itself, once it is firmly established, he
has no right to disregard. It is too important--I mean, actually
important in its practical results.

To get an idea of _how_ important, observe what happens when a legend
blows up. A perfect example of that phenomenon occurred not long since.
With the discovery of the semi-official murder of Matteotti in Rome, and
the revelations that followed, the Mussolini legend exploded and was
gone, utterly. It had to go. Either Signor Mussolini was himself among
the criminals or he was helpless against the machinations of a corrupt
and evil clique. In either case, the legend of the ‘Duce,’ the
super-man, the benevolent tyrant, wisely, righteously and firmly
governing Italy for her own good, became untenable. There remained only
Mussolini, the man. And, with the collapse of that legend, the whole
strength, other than physical, of Fascismo evaporated. Yet it was only a
silly little legend that, even left undisturbed, could not have lasted
fifteen years.

In the last sentence you may discover an indication that, for my part, I
distinguish between the value of ephemeral legends and that of legends
which endure. So, in truth, I do. If the Mussolini legend and the
Coolidge legend appear to me absurd aberrations that we should have been
better without, tried and established legends, like the Lincoln or the
Washington legend, seem to me of great value; I am not at all upset by
the impossibility of getting through or behind them. They are, I fancy,
of more importance than the men about whom they grew up. Not Lincoln
himself, but that glowing Lincoln legend, sways multitudes, and sets,
above all the cheap facts of actual politics, a standard of what, at his
best, a President of the United States may and should be. There really
is, incongruously and almost incredibly, a rough fundamental idealism
displayed by a good many men in American public life, and, better,
demanded of them by the mass of American citizens, that is largely due
to the solid permanence of that legend. Not for anything would I see the
legend vanish; which is fortunate, since it never will.

If I am right in this, that in the long run it is not a man but his
legend that affects events and the natures of other men for good or
evil, then it is of no importance that we cannot penetrate through it to
the man himself and learn whether or not his legend falsifies his
character. Nevertheless, the problem is a fascinating one, partly
because it is insoluble, but chiefly, I fancy, because hidden in its
depths lies that eternal question: ‘What is truth?’

My own undocumented theory is that an enduring legend does not falsify
the individual about whom it has formed. When a man falls in love with a
woman he has an exalted perception of her as something rare and
wonderful, yet perfectly definite, concrete, individual. From no one
else could he receive that particular sensation. When he was in love
before, he received one, equally sharp, from another woman; but it was
not this sensation. If it were, I should agree with those who consider
the poor creature merely deluded. Since it is not, I am inclined to
believe that he has obtained a fleeting glimpse of truth. Not the
average daily truth about the person worshipped, but an unrealized and
unrealizable yet more significant truth--a vision of what that person
might become at her best and truest. Presently the emotion fades and is
gone, either utterly or to return but faintly for an instant now and
then, ever so rarely; but it was surely, in its moment, too sharp and
clear a fact to have been without significance. It was actually, I
fancy, a sort of intensification of the personality glimpsed, together
with a stripping away of everything unessential.

A somewhat similar intensification and stripping away it is at least
possible that legend, an enduring legend, gives. Seizing on the
individual’s essentially personal dreams, evil or good, divined beneath
a few of his inadequate acts, and exaggerating, or perhaps only
intensifying, them, legend gives us these as the man. Probably that was
not the way the individual appeared to himself. Probably no other
individual ever saw him like that, unless, for a moment, his passionate
lover or his passionate enemy. Yet that, says legend confidently, is
what he was.




TRUTH AND FICTION IN ITALY


There is in most contemporary Italian fiction a limpness, flaccidity--I
hardly know what to call it--which at its least offensive expresses a
feeble despair, and at its worst becomes a whine. It is not the
expression of a rugged pessimism; there is nothing rugged about it.
Rather, it reveals a lack of vitality, a thin-bloodedness, the spirit
one is accustomed to think of as ‘womanish,’ though, as a matter of
fact, the women writers of Italy appear less guilty in this respect than
the men. Grazia Deledda and even Annie Vivanti show more virility than
most of their confrères, and there is gusto in the slap-stick prose of
Matilde Serao, despite its appalling sentimentality. But Marino Moretti,
a fine and sensitive writer, is only too clear an exponent of the fault,
Panzini himself often succumbs to it, and even the late Federico Tozzi,
cut off by early death from what promised to be real achievement, was
far from guiltless.

Clear as the fault appears to me, and arousing, as it does, an
exasperated distaste, it is difficult for me to make it clear to any one
else. This is because it is at bottom the result of an attitude of mind,
a conventionally accepted attitude of mind, rather than anything more
definite. It is easy to lay an accusing finger on the concomitants, the
specifically annoying tricks and habits that go with it (more obviously,
of course, in third-rate writers, such as Teresah or Luciano Zuccoli):
the tender mournful contemplation of something small and helpless, the
employment of pity for its own sweet sake, the abuse of diminutives (‘he
took her poor, emaciated, little hand in his’), etc., but the thing
itself, the spirit behind all this, remains elusive, and will remain so
until we have got at its source.

Whatever this may turn out to be, the characteristic is doubly
obnoxious: it is obnoxious not only in itself, but also because it
grossly misrepresents Italian life and the Italian spirit. It is true
that there is a vast deal of sentimentality loose in Italy, always
readily on tap, as it were, but this national sentimentality is a hearty
thing, a wasted by-product of exuberant life, like the sticky yellow
foam churned up by a tumultuous sea; not thin-blooded, careful, and
mauve-coloured, like that of the printed page.

Italy is overflowing with life, perhaps even lawless with it; for the
race is too much alive, individual by individual, to permit of
successful organization, still less of being standardized either in
behaviour or thought. The foreigner who has come to know Italy will have
encountered various national traits that displease him as conflicting
too much with those of his own country, but nowhere in the whole
peninsula will he have found the grey devitalized dullness of
Anglo-Saxon suburbia or the poetic musical languor popularly ascribed
to the Italian race--why, I have no idea, unless because Neapolitans
frequently sing at night and because _dolce far niente_ is the one
Italian phrase with which all foreigners are acquainted. Misled in
advance by a prolific and incredibly wayward literature, the foreigner,
like a reversed Columbus, expects to find Cathay and instead discovers
the New World. There are in Italians old, old traits that suddenly crop
out at unexpected moments, there are roots that go down into an
unfathomable past, but the spirit of the race is young, vivid, almost
raw. Foreigners unacquainted with Italy were surprised by the phenomenon
of Fascismo. No one with any knowledge of Italy can have been surprised
either by Fascismo or by the sturdy opposition to it.

Nothing, in short, can be falser than the conception of Italy as a
country of dreamers and idealists. On the contrary, the people, by and
large, are matter-of-fact, hard-headed and practical; they like American
bathrooms, central heating and the early operas of Verdi; I often wonder
that no American business-man has had the acumen to open a branch
five-and-ten-cent store in Italy. A full-blooded corkscrew at two lire,
a hearty can-opener at one lira, would sell and sell and sell. Italians
of my acquaintance fairly pore over the advertisements in the _Saturday
Evening Post_; they would love the Sears-Roebuck catalogue.

Then, in the name of consistency, why this mournful emasculated prose?

Well, it is a long story. I think at bottom it goes back to the schools.
At Harvard I went through a number of courses in English composition, in
each of which I had to write a one-page theme every day and a three-page
theme once a fortnight. It took me years to recover from the discipline,
and I have an almost guilty feeling that even now when I have learned to
write in my own way a Harvard professor would still cover my pages with
red marks; but at least we were urged to write simply. Our rhetorical
passages were ruthlessly stricken out; we were held down, even
contemptuously, to a positive bareness of expression. ‘Say what you have
to say, if anything, in as few words as possible’ was the message (only
the word would never have been allowed) dinned into our ears. I still
think it an excellent training.

In Italian schools, beginning with the most elementary, training in
composition is diametrically the opposite. There is a model (and such a
florid model!) for everything. Shall a sunset be described? (‘No!’ they
would have said in an American school). Manzoni (who is never forgotten
for a moment) has done this in just the right way on page 9007 of _I
Promessi Sposi_. Base your description on his. Never, so far as I can
learn, is the child told to describe, as well as he can, exactly and
only what he sees. If Manzoni, however, were the only model, imitative
Italian prose might be less rhetorical than it is and might contain some
reflected vigour; but there are, to mention only two others, Silvio
Pellico (who had a love affair in prison with a spider) and De Amicis,
who wrote some tolerable books but who also wrote _Cuore_. _Cuore_ is
given to every child as soon as the unfortunate creature is able to
read, and as soon as he is able to write he is taught to copy its
sentiments and style. There are more, and more nauseating, tears shed in
_Cuore_ than in all the _Elsie_ books put together. Compared with it,
_Immensee_, which, I am told, no German can, or anyway could some years
ago, read without weeping, is as stony as the dictionary. I know of no
other book so obscene as _Cuore_. No, I withdraw that statement. There
is one worse book. It was written by some Englishwoman, is called _The
Story of Pigling Bland_, and is about a dear little pig who fell in love
with a dear little girl-pig, and gave her peppermints, and watched over
her when she fell asleep; but I do not think that it is used as a
text-book in English schools.

There are models even for letters to be written by a child to its
parents. These are the sentiments the child should have; this is the way
they should be expressed. I know a charming and intelligent woman who
has a daughter of eighteen--like most Italian young girls, almost
indistinguishable from American girls of her generation: hard, _chic_,
slangy, fast, but without ever losing her head, not an ounce of
tenderness in her. ‘See what a delightful letter Elena has written me
from her school,’ said the mother proudly to me one day. I read the
letter, aghast. ‘Beloved Mamma ... I think of you always, always ... I
dream of the hour when we shall be reunited and I can press you again to
my heart.’

Given this methodical corruption of minors, it is not strange that the
prose style of the average mature Italian and of Italian journalism
should be hopelessly verbose and weighted with rhetorical emotional
platitudes that do not express the genuine feelings of the writer. For
example, boxing matches have become very popular in Italy of late, and
there is little perceptible difference between the Italian crowd at one
of these and the crowd at an American fight. There is the same doggy
masculine smell, the same blue haze of smoke drifting across the glare
of the arc-lights above the ring, the same fierce excitement--nothing,
in short, that could possibly have come out of _Cuore_. Such was the
audience at a recent match in Milan when Bruno Frattini, the Italian
champion, was defeated on points by Ted Lewis. But the newspaper account
in the _Ambrosiano_ next day! ‘Could it be that Bruno, our Bruno, was
defeated? For a moment we were silent, dazed. Our eyes were full of
tears.’ I wish I had kept that reporter’s story. It was worth
translating in full--only it would have demanded ten pages.

Here in this absurd instance, perhaps because it is so absurd, we
somehow get a flash of insight into the origin of the problem. For even
with a comment on school training I did not go deep enough. The real
problem is to discover why mature, fairly intelligent Italians permit
that kind of training to continue, and approve of its results. This, I
think, is the answer: to an Italian life is pragmatic, art academic. The
Italian takes life as it comes, with no theories about it, with no
belief in its having a meaning; but for the printed word he has hard and
fast rules. He does not think of art as an interpretation of life; he
thinks of it as something quite separate. (But if you ask me why this
should be true, I confess that I am beyond my depth and do not
know--unless it is simply that the average Italian is too sceptical and
matter-of-fact to believe any interpretation of life possible).
Nowhere--not even in the America of ten years ago, where the majority of
people struggled, as they must always struggle everywhere, to make a
difficult living, but read sunny fairytales by Myrtle Reed and Eleanor
Porter--nowhere have life and art been kept so distinct as they are
still kept in Italy. It is grateful (especially to a writer) to discover
that in Italy more esteem is felt for an author than for a millionaire,
but it is saddening to discover, a little more gradually, that this is
not because the author is held to know more about life than the
millionaire, but that, instead, he is worshipped as the priest of an
esoteric cult with a well-established ritual.

Here, however, it becomes necessary to point out a significant contrast
between the Italian and the American attitude toward the arts. However
far from considering them an interpretation of life, Italians have for
the arts neither contempt nor kindly toleration, but a genuine reverent
love. Literate Italians are passionately devoted to all the arts, and
illiterate Italians to at least one--music. So that, in a sense, the
arts do form an important part of virtually every Italian’s life--but a
shut-off separate part. From this derives a tyranny over the arts, that
could not possibly exist in America or England, where people do not feel
strongly enough about them to desire to tyrannize over them. An American
or an Englishman will listen timidly to music that he does not
understand, or timidly read (or claim to have read) a book that he finds
incomprehensible, or timidly and gravely walk through the halls of a
picture show which, so far as he can see, reveals only insanity. For
‘people who know’ may presently announce that all these things are works
of genius, and then where would he be if he had laughed at them or
protested? And, anyway, what does it all matter? The Italian will throw
aside the book with a curse, laugh with uproarious contempt at the
pictures, and hiss the music into silence. He ‘knows what he likes.’ It
is what he was brought up on; and that, and nothing else, is art. And it
all matters to him very much indeed.

Now, intelligence averaging no higher in Italy than elsewhere, the
result of this condition upon the arts is disastrous. It compels them to
retain outworn forms that may be in themselves as good as newer forms,
or even better, but that cannot be employed to-day for the fresh
expression of emotion or thought. A deadly imitative conservatism
crushes the arts in Italy. In painting hardly any influence later than
that of the French Impressionists is apparent; in music almost none
later than Debussy; in stage-setting and lighting none, positively none,
later than Belasco. The staging of operas in the remodelled Scala is
magnificent; the detail is elaborate and costly; the costumes are
impeccable; real stars twinkle in a purple night-sky indistinguishable
from that of Rapallo. But of the interesting experiments in
non-realistic stage-setting that are being made in Germany, America, and
to a lesser extent in France, there is no trace. There daren’t be. Just
one such stage-set was attempted at the Scala last season--a timid one,
at that; but the public would have none of it. Perhaps it is better for
the arts not to have too many people care much about them, and
undoubtedly it is better for the artists. Composers like Malipiero or
painters like Ferrazzi must either be neglected or attain, and be
content with, a reputation abroad; but they may get a wry satisfaction
from the knowledge that if their work is good enough to endure until it
‘dates’ as something perfect out of a dead past, their pictures will
then (but not until then) be hung in every gallery, and their music
performed at every theatre, of their native land.

The tyranny over literature is not quite so great as that over music,
for the obvious reason that a book is read in solitude by an individual,
not performed before a very articulate audience, and also because the
reading public is smaller than the opera public. Nevertheless, if small,
it is of the same kind and only a little more alert to new impressions.
It, too, knows what it wants and that this is art. The result is to
weaken and emasculate literature. Not, of course, that a writer of
integrity will deliberately seek to give the public what it wants, but
he can hardly avoid being discouraged by the knowledge that it wants
only a repetition of something that has already been done. Moreover, the
writer is, after all, himself an Italian, with the Italian’s thorough
early grounding in verbosity, rhetoric and sentimentality, and with his
instinct to keep life and literature separate. He attempts, even
desperately, to write about life, but somehow the attempt does not often
succeed. The result is thin and tired. Some spark is lacking. The stuff
does not ring true. It remains ‘literary.’

But have not writers, and other artists, in all countries had to
struggle with difficulties, from which they have emerged more or less
triumphantly? Surely English literature has sprung from a milieu hostile
to all the arts, and is but the more vigorous for that? True, and so do
they struggle in Italy; but it is as though they must start from farther
back and overcome elementary handicaps that they should surely be
spared. Even to nullify that persistent early training in opulent
rhetoric and that in verbosity must demand heroic effort; yet most of
them have conquered the former, and some the latter. It is a triumph
that they do actually write freshly. But that attitude toward
literature as a thing in itself is hard to overcome. And there are other
dangers and difficulties.

For example, the literary clique. In Italian life the individual is
strong, the organized group weak; which is a splendid and sane condition
of affairs. In Italian literature, as in the other arts, the group
flourishes disastrously and frequently submerges the individual. Let a
man write a few books that reveal talent, and immediately a group forms
about him, with a cult of its hero and a critical estimate of his work
to which he will thereafter find himself attempting to conform, thus,
hedged about by a wall of literary ideas, growing less and less capable
of an individual interpretation of life itself. Or perhaps there are
three or four men about whom the group forms, either because they
resemble one another in thought or in manner of expression, or perhaps
only because they happen to live in the same city. Then the result is
even more harmful, since the various individual writers also react upon
one another. Witness the young Florentine group--Soffici, Palazzeschi,
Papini, etc.--all once writers of promise, all fallen into premature
decay. Panzini has suffered perceptibly from this kind of thing; lesser
writers have suffered even more. When G. A. Borgese was writing his
first novel, _Rubè_, the reverent clique about him heralded the yet
unfinished book as a masterpiece, the first genuine synthesis of--I
forget what, but the word ‘synthesis’ must certainly have been used.
Any one who has read _Rubè_ is aware that it is very far from being a
masterpiece. That is not Signor Borgese’s fault. What _is_ his fault,
however, and of great detriment to the novel, is his obvious
determination throughout to make it a masterpiece.

Ah, well, cults exist in other countries than Italy. One recalls the
well-known scene in Victor Hugo’s salon, where the Master sat on a kind
of pontifical throne, and uttered occasional maxims to the worshippers
grouped about his feet. ‘Je crois en Dieu,’ he announced once, after a
long silence. Another and reverent silence followed. Then a woman spoke.
‘Chose étrange!’ she murmured. ‘Un dieu qui croit en Dieu.’

No enumeration of the handicaps under which an Italian writer must
struggle would be complete without mention of the prolonged baneful
influence on both prose and verse, but especially on prose, of
D’Annunzio. D’Annunzio himself is what he is, and I have no intention of
discussing here the merits and defects of his own important achievement;
I am only glancing at the influence his work has for thirty years
exerted on minor writers--an influence bad almost without qualification.
It has led scores of writers away from simplicity, away from life (by
which I do not mean only away from realism), into a deliberate tortured
complexity, beneath which was nothing, a blank emptiness. Even to-day
Italian prose has not shaken itself quite free from that appalling
influence. It corrupts the work of Virgilio Brocchi oddly, since there
is at bottom nothing ‘Dannunziano’ in its spirit, and it pervades that
of Antonio Beltramelli, to mention only two contemporary novelists of
some talent. It is greatly to the credit of Panzini that there is no
trace of it in his work, though he has been subjected to it all his
life, being of precisely D’Annunzio’s age.

(One firm exception must be made to all that I have said about the
thinness and flaccidity of Italian prose. Side by side with literary
prose, there has always existed in Italy a polemical prose which has
never lacked vitality. To-day it is stronger than ever. It is, in fact,
terrific in its vigour, insolence and scurrility. This is probably
because it is not considered a form of art; so that in it people let
themselves go, and express with unrestrained violence their fiercely
partisan hatreds. At any rate, to find really living, breathing, Italian
prose you must turn to-day to the polemical editorials of the press--the
bitter stinging attacks on political adversaries that you will find in
the _Popolo d’Italia_, the _Giustizia_, _Cremona Nuova_, and the Genoa
_Lavoro_).[1]

Although I have enumerated a good many obstacles to the achievement of
anything really significant in contemporary Italian fiction, I am still
dissatisfied. Given sufficient strength, sufficient vitality, writers
should have surmounted even these difficulties.

Given sufficient strength. Perhaps that is the real point. The men
striving are not strong enough.

Poets come from wherever God put them, but, almost without exception,
the prose writers of Italy spring from the bourgeoisie. From the
‘popolo,’ none; from the aristocracy, ‘Black’ and provincial (even when
residing in Rome itself), occupied only with religion, the retention of
its rights and the adequate marriage of its children, or from the
cosmopolitan aristocracy, occupied only with diversions, there have come
but one or two names. No, the writers come from the bourgeoisie. And the
bourgeoisie, in England far stronger than any other class, is in Italy
the weakest, the least full-blooded.

Despite the fact that my own intimate Italian friends and close
acquaintances are perforce members of the middle and upper classes, it
is of that vast third class, the ‘popolo,’ that I think first when I
think of Italy. Pardon the foreign word. ‘The common people’ is too
superior, ‘the People’ obscured by demagogic connotation. Also, before
continuing, I must beg you to believe that I am not being sentimental,
that I have no parlour belief in the Nobility of Labour, but that I base
what I have to say on what I personally know (and I wish it might be
more) of a great many individuals belonging to this class.

The virtues that make the ‘popolo’ in the main so lovable--cheerfulness,
sturdy patience, kindliness, self-sacrifice, great generosity, ready
active pity for suffering--are of course released through the difficult
laborious existence the ‘popolo’ leads and has always led. Potential
vices lie darkly awaiting their chance in the heart of every man. Not
class, but only the circumstances of class prevent their unfolding. The
second generation of a peasant family that has been promoted (if you can
call it that) to the shop-keeping class is apt to be as harsh and greedy
as any family of Sicilian absentee landlords. The vices so long crushed
down have come into their own with a vengeance. No matter. Greed and
selfishness may be less common in the Italian ‘popolo’ than elsewhere
merely because there is scant nourishment for them in poverty, but that
the virtues I have mentioned are so apparent there is a tribute to the
race. Poverty can release them; it cannot create them.

The point is, however, that the virtues I have mentioned as roughly
characteristic of the Italian ‘popolo’ are the warm-blooded virtues of
life. A generous or a self-sacrificing man is more alive than a greedy
or a selfish man. And life really seems to be richer, fuller and more
exuberant in this class than in any other. There is nothing stolid or
dull about these people. Their passions are strong, but not of the body
alone; they flow over into the mind. An Anglo-Saxon day-labourer or a
Finn or a Swede has his recurrent moments of terrific passion, sexual or
other, but between times appears to relapse into a state of blank mental
non-existence. This is, at least, the impression he makes on an
outsider. Of course, behind his inarticulateness a broad silent stream
of thought _may_ be flowing; but, frankly, I doubt it. Nothing that he
says when he does occasionally break his silence justifies the
assumption. The Italian of a similar class is, if friendly toward you,
immensely communicative; and I submit that if a person is communicative
it is because he has something to communicate.

The Italian of the ‘popolo’ surely has a great deal. His mind is alert,
his curiosity unbounded, and, best of all, his fancy exuberant. More
often than not, he has a strong sense of humour. His mind is as robust
as his body. And, though he interlards his conversation with proverbs
(his share in the racial curse), it consists otherwise of vivid,
unhackneyed, often magnificently ungrammatical turns of phrase, that
convey freshly his own direct sensations.

Now this last is characteristic only of the ‘popolo.’ In polite
conversation Italians of other classes mostly talk like books. That
appalling education of theirs has been too much for them. Oh, not that
there is any radical difference between them and the Italians of the
‘popolo’! The education has been too much for the latter also--when it
exists. Such letters as I received during the war from slightly educated
Italians of the ‘popolo’ at the front! Letters in the style of Manzoni,
letters in the style of _Cuore_, letters whose rhetoric could not
possibly bear any relation to the sights and sounds and emotions the
writers were experiencing. I felt like crying: ‘Evviva
l’analfabetismo!’

But how different it was when these same men talked of what they had
experienced! Neither war-correspondence nor imaginative writing has ever
given me the illusion of actual presence on the battlefield that I
received from their words. They would describe, quite simply, some small
homely fact, some unimportant episode, because it was what had struck
them, and at once the whole scene would spring into sharp life. Nor was
it always merely straight description. Sentiment and even character
analysis were hidden underneath. Of the new raw officers rushed without
sufficient training to the front after Caporetto, one soldier said
kindly: ‘Poveretti! they didn’t even know the difference between the
sound of an Austrian shell and an Italian.’ ‘When I shot I never aimed
at any one. I didn’t want to kill,’ said another man (who had received
the Bronze Medal for going out with two companions and capturing a
machine-gun). ‘We didn’t like the shocktroops; they frightened us,’ said
the same man. ‘They looked wild. They went out, half drunk, with their
long knives in their teeth, and they never took any prisoners.’

My hope for Italian literature is that sooner or later it may come from
the ‘popolo,’ and that it may come uncorrupted by the kind of education
at present in vogue, and corrupted as little as possible by any
education at all save that in life itself, which the ‘popolo’ already
possesses. If such a revolution in literature ever does take place, it
will be like that in the Middle Ages when writers forsook Latin for the
vernacular. Nor does it seem to me improbable. The condition of the
labouring class is considerably better than before the war; a little
leisure may presently be achieved. And at the same time the old
education is weakening, growing decrepit. Professors are dying out, or
at any rate becoming scarcer, since their salaries are not high enough
to support life in the social condition to which they are condemned. By
its stiffening of standards the Riforma Gentile results in cutting down
drastically the number of young men who can attend a university. And the
salaries of teachers in the elementary schools are so inadequate to the
present cost of living that the ranks must be filled from among the
‘popolo.’

Since the war the pace of life itself is swifter and fiercer than ever,
while literature grows weaker, more anaemic. Presently the water will
rise too high; surplus life will be too strong; with a rush it will flow
over and submerge the old literature with a new rich wave.

It would be unfair not to add that for years the desire for such a
renovation has been cherished by many Italians. What else but a reaction
against the debility of Italian literature was, and still is, the whole
Futurist movement? Consciously it was, among other things, a passionate
protest against verbosity, rhetoric and sentimentalism; less consciously
perhaps, with its demand for velocity, a protest against the separation
of literature from life. And, though Futurism has not itself created
any work of importance, it has had an important influence on Italian
writers, an influence which perhaps did more than any other to overcome
that of D’Annunzio. Even to-day Futurism is still to be reckoned with.
But it, too, is a conscious movement, and thus tends, as Marinetti
himself half admits, to become academic, to crystalline in the forms
with which it reacted against other forms.

Once again, it is not to movements, but to individuals that one must
look--to individuals who care nothing for groups and less than nothing
for tendencies, either to follow or to combat them, but who carve out
unaided their own conception of life. Of such was Giovanni Verga, who
died a few years ago more than eighty years old, neglected and almost
forgotten, but with a magnificent achievement behind him that throws a
bleak pitiless light on the tawdriness of his contemporaries and
successors. Now that he is dead, appreciation of what he accomplished is
growing; people are reading him more. Imitation of Verga will not be
Verga; you cannot create a race of giants without giant blood; but it
cannot be quite profitless to turn at last to an author who built
literature out of life.




LUIGI PIRANDELLO


Pirandello has written a great deal. In addition to the numerous plays
by which he is rightly known, there are several novels and a large
number of short stories--so large a number, in fact, that he is
collecting them in a twenty-four volume edition under the title,
_Novelle per un anno_--one for each day of the year. Five of the
twenty-four volumes have been published so far--closely printed books of
some three hundred pages each; but I find in them little of the
Pirandello who is an important figure in Italian literature to-day.
Despite his announcement in the preface that many of the stories are
new, that all have been carefully retouched and many rewritten, they
bear the brand of journalism. They rarely descend as low as the average
American magazine story, but, for all the prolific inventiveness they
reveal, they have something of the same monotony, adequate workmanship
and lack of distinction. Nor is the significance of the thought or
emotion often striking. Now and again one does get a hint of the
Pirandello of the plays--in the extraordinary, almost wasteful (and
often wasted) power of characterization, for example, or in the
preoccupation with death--but these things are obscured by the verbose
pedestrian prose, quite without freshness. This lack of distinction is
certainly not due to carelessness; rather, the tales seem heavy and
laboured. Indeed, from all that I have read of Pirandello I am inclined
to believe that it is only conversation, dramatic dialogue, that he can
write well and freshly. There would be nothing surprising in this. It is
notoriously rare for a good dramatist to be a good novelist or
_novellista_. And I am not even convinced that the monotonous melancholy
of the stories (somebody dies in almost every one) has much to do with
their author’s predisposition to tragedy. The tragic ending is almost as
much a convention in an Italian, as the happy ending in an American,
story; and since in only a few of these tales have I felt the note of
real poignancy and been even faintly moved, I am the more inclined to
class their sadness as conventionality.

Those that deal with Pirandello’s own native Sicily have greater warmth,
a hint of tenderness. _Lontano_, the story of a Norwegian sailor left,
ill with typhoid, by his ship companions at the little town of Porto
Empedocle, nursed by the niece of that absurd, delightful, old
character, Don Paranza, a Sicilian ‘Vice Consul for Scandinavia,’
finally marrying her, and settling down to live in that sunburnt
country, an eternal stranger to every one, including his wife, is
genuinely touching. But the undistinguished prose in which it is too
wordily told is like a dry field that should be burned over for the
sake of the fresh green grass struggling beneath.

The last stories in this volume (the fifth) are the best, hint more
clearly at the Pirandello of the plays, at both his virtues and his
defects; so it is just possible that the entire collection is being made
chronologically (though nothing is said of any such plan in the
preface), in which case, to judge them fairly, one ought, I suppose, to
await the publication of the other nineteen volumes.

It would be unfair to blame these stories for lacking profundity of
thought, since a story may of course have profound significance without
actually expressing any thought at all, were it not that there is a
great deal of philosophizing in them, and that often it is made the
point of the story. Since this is so, it seems fair to note that the
philosophizing is pretty superficial. Take, for instance, the story
called _Niente_ (which is far superior to most of the others because it
is nearly all in dialogue). A hack doctor is awakened at three in the
morning at the pharmacy where he is on duty, to attend a young man who
has attempted to commit suicide. But on arrival at the horrible
tenement-house in which the tragedy took place, he finds that the
victim, dying, has been removed to a hospital. So the whole story is
simply conversation--first between the doctor and the annoyed
middle-class relative of the suicide, then between the doctor and the
wretched inhabitants of the apartment in which the young man had lived.
Bit by bit through this dialogue the tragedy and its causes are
revealed, with a skill worthy of that displayed in _Sei personaggi in
cerca d’autore_. (Indeed, of this story a striking one-act play might
easily be made). One would like the point to be merely the revelation of
the obscure tragedy, with no more moral to it than to Kipling’s _Without
Benefit of Clergy_--or with the tremendous moral of its not having one.
But what, instead, do we get? The doctor’s philosophizing. The
unfortunate young man (he says) had written verses, wanted to be a poet,
dreamed of glory--and the daughter of the house was in love with him.
Supposing he had lived, what would his dream of glory have come to? A
poor useless book of verse. And his dream of love? ‘Your daughter! He’d
have married your daughter!’ he cries to the irate dishevelled mistress
of the house. ‘Oh, beautiful and adorned with all the virtues, I have no
doubt, but still a woman, my dear lady, a woman! And after a little,
good God! with children and misery, think what she’d have been! And the
world, my dear woman, do you know what the world would have become for
him? A house! This house!’ And the doctor goes out, muttering: ‘_No_
books! _No_ women! _No_ house! Nothing!’

Now, despite its vividness, this is thin and superficial and, if taken
as the moral, at least as inadequate as any other moral would have been
to such a tragedy. It may perhaps be taken as an adequate moral if the
point of the story is not the young man’s tragedy, but the character of
the doctor; but I fear that, instead, we have here Pirandello himself in
a characteristic mood of hatred and disgust for grovelling life. In the
last story in the book, _La distruzione dell’uomo_, you get the mood
again, and the moralizing, unrelieved by a really possible, poignant
tragedy. Here a young student murders a commonplace woman of forty-seven
because she is about to have a child. She has been pregnant year after
year before this, but each time has had a miscarriage. This time it is
clear that the child will be born. And the student, in disgust for her,
her husband, the squalid tenement-house they, and he, live in, and the
squalid world beyond, murders the woman with her unborn child, feeling
fiercely that he is murdering humanity itself, destroying Man.

A pity! Not only because there are a dozen moods that might be felt in
considering that middle-aged couple, that distressing eighth-rate
apartment-house, with its dirty dishevelled walls and ragged display of
washing and the filthy children swarming in its courtyard, instead of
the one, not very perceptive mood of disgust to which we are held; but
also because in the expression of even this one mood Pirandello has
here, as often elsewhere, overdone himself, so that positively one
finishes the story in such a reaction of cheerfulness as almost to agree
with dear Pippa’s favourite remark. There you had it all--a masterly
picture of the house, of the quarter (that quarter of Rome has
certainly changed for the better of late years), and of the heavy
elderly couple, she with vast distorted stomach, he with an only less
vast one, making laboriously the daily walk prescribed for her by the
doctor, out past the church of Sant’ Agnese and back again, out and back
again. Why not let it go at that and leave the reader to feel what he
pleases? Most readers, I think, would feel pathos in the solemn anxiety
of those two to add one more inhabitant to that house and quarter--and
world, if you like. But if disgust was all one could feel, that, too, he
would surely feel more keenly if left to feel it undirected.

The best known of the novels, _Il fu Mattia Pascal_, first published
some twenty years ago when Pirandello was still a comparatively young
man, is better written than the short stories. Or is it? Perhaps it has,
rather, a youthful brio that they lack, a kind of gusto that rushes one
along through the dry heaps of words. And also it is told in the first
person; which gives it an advantage. It is only in this gusto that the
book is young, however. Its spirit is not young at all, but cool, rather
hard and sophisticated--not in a callow way, but maturely. I like the
moralizing in the novel as much as I dislike it in most of the short
stories, partly because here it is a natural expression of the
characters who indulge in it, partly because it is in itself often very
suggestive; indeed, I am inclined to think that the moralizing is the
best of the book. On the other hand, the most interesting thing is the
plot, because in it one discerns the as yet incoherent beginnings of an
idea that, developed, has come to haunt Pirandello--the idea of the
reality of illusion, and thus of the manifold nature of personality. In
the plays one almost never gets away from some variation on this theme.
_Sei personaggi in cerca d’autore_ is hardly less frankly concerned with
it than _Vestire gli ignudi_ or _Come prima, meglio di prima_. But in
the novel there is only the foreshadowing of the idea; it is certainly
not made clear to the reader, and was almost equally certainly not yet
clear to Pirandello himself; and the result is confusion.

Mattia Pascal is believed by his family and friends to have committed
suicide. A body supposed to be his is discovered and formally buried.
Taking advantage of this, he gives himself a new name, Adriano Meis,
invents a past for himself, and sets out to live anew, free. But he
finds that he cannot endure the emptiness of liberty any more than he
could endure the chains in which he struggled when alive. He is sucked
back into life, and eventually falls in love with a girl, Adriana, but
cannot marry her because the man as whom she knows him is a fictitious
man, with no papers, no _stato civile_, nothing. He--or, at least, the
man he was before he died--has a wife already. So he ‘commits suicide’ a
second time, becomes once more Mattia Pascal, and returns to his
home--to find his wife long since married to his best friend, and with a
baby. As far as I can make it out, what he then does is to live in a
state half-way between life and death. He leaves his wife to his
friend, and becomes--calls himself--‘the late Mattia Pascal.’

Now this is all very unsatisfactory, not really worked out, and in that
single sense ‘young.’ Whatever significance was intended remains
obscure, because, I am convinced, it was obscure to the author. There is
an abundance, a super-abundance, of ideas--enough, it must be admitted,
to justify in part those critics who already twenty years ago found
Pirandello ‘too cerebral.’ But my own objection is not that Mattia
Pascal reasons about himself exceedingly at every moment, nor even that
I cannot discern significance beneath the story, can only feel that it
might have held some profound significance. A study of a man who reasons
exceedingly is a quite legitimate subject for a novel, and it is not
essential that a study of character should pretend to be anything more.
My objection is that, even granting the contradictions that go to make
up any individual, Mattia Pascal does not hold together. He is shown us
at the beginning as an impetuous young man of considerable force of
character; yet, when freed from his unpleasant surroundings, and, by a
run of luck at Monte Carlo, the possessor of 82,000 lire, he sets out to
live frugally on this sum for the rest of his life, doing nothing at
all. Would he really have behaved in this way? The explanation, that he
could never have a _stato civile_, is weak. He was not so possessed of
love for his own country as to have to live there. He could have gone
anywhere else, almost (this being before the war), and have been taken
at his word. Indeed, before his stroke of luck, he had seriously thought
of emigrating to America. Neither was he a sick soul burdened by life
and glad to be free from it. He was merely, quite justifiably, burdened
by the conditions of his own personal environment. He might well, being
curious and cynical, have done for a short time what he did; but two
months of it would have bored into action the Mattia Pascal we had met.
Again, he is hard to the point of callousness, if not of brutality; that
we see at once. Nevertheless, in his way, he did love the girl he
married, and that he was not incapable of intense emotion we see from
his grief at the death of his child. Then, allowing for all possible
contradictions, is it conceivable that he could have so gaily let his
wife imagine him dead and, if not grieve for him, at least remain in
misery, while here was he with 82,000 lire in his pocket? He might have
done it--but so blithely? Again, we are shown him really in love with
the gentle and pathetic Adriana. Yet he can simulate a second suicide
and leave _her_, at any rate, to an agony of grief. Why? Because as
Adriano Meis he has no real existence, is but a shadow. He has no _stato
civile_, and can’t marry her; while, if he is Mattia Pascal, he can’t
marry her, since he has a wife already. Nonsense! He could have told
Adriana the truth, broken the whole tenuous chain of reasoning, and let
her decide whether she would escape abroad with him and marry him as
Adriano Meis. A hundred to one that she would have done so despite her
religion! But if she had not, she would have been infinitely less
unhappy than he made her by what he did do. There is a hardness, a
cruelty, about all this that is due more to the author than to the
protagonists. It is as though he would not let them alone. They are
flesh and blood, and he will treat them as marionettes--for the purpose
of his thesis. And, to save me, I cannot make out what his thesis really
is. It might be: that there is no such thing as freedom, no escape from
life; or that liberty is more unbearable than slavery; or that
everything is illusion. It does not seem to me to be clearly any one of
these things or any other--least of all what Pirandello himself
indicates in a short essay written for the new edition of the novel:
that people are the marionettes of their own idea of themselves until
that idea becomes intolerable and they tear off the mask and reveal
their naked faces. This is, in truth, an idea that underlies the plays,
and Pirandello, writing to-day, may now read it back into what he wrote
twenty years ago, but I challenge any one to discover it in the novel
itself. A perplexing, unsatisfactory, frustrated book, but closer than
the short stories, in power, to the plays.

There are two of the plays that I have neither seen nor read, but, among
all the others, _L’uomo, la bestia e la virtù_ stands by itself. It is
true that here you get, and with a vengeance, the idea expressed in
that supplementary essay to the novel--about the _burattinaio_ who makes
people imitate puppets until at moments of intense feeling they break
loose and become natural; but there the resemblance ends. For this play
is a wild, magnificent, breathless farce. Yes ...? The exasperating
thing in writing about Pirandello is that one must qualify any such
definite statement as that. The play is, indeed, a rollicking farce--for
the audience; but for the characters it is a desperate drama coming to
the sheer edge of tragedy. Now in a typical farce of the French variety
(to which, in its exceedingly risky plot, its tricks and unexpected
turns, this play might well belong) the spectator feels that the
characters are only playing at suffering, in order to heighten for the
audience the farcical effect. Here they are in desperate earnest, in
anguish. Once grant the absurd situation, which, after all, is
conceivably possible, and their agony is not even overdone. They are
real people struggling in the midst of a farce situation. And, with
this, cruelty is deliberately, maliciously forced upon the spectator by
the author. For the more acutely the characters suffer, the more violent
becomes the spectator’s mirth. There is something--I don’t
know--sadistic about it, and afterward one is left troubled,
uncomfortable and a little resentful toward the author. It is as though
one had laughed at a man who had fallen down in the street, when really
he had been seriously hurt by his fall. And also what is one to think
of a farce in which things as profoundly true as the following are
said? ‘A real home, with all the sweet painful associations that the
word “home” stirs within us, is what others--our fathers and
mothers--made for us with their thoughts and their solicitude. And
_their_ home was not that one, but the one _their_ parents had made for
them.’ ... ‘You look at others from the outside, and they don’t interest
you. What are they for you? Nothing! Images passing in front of you!
Inside, inside, you must feel them, identifying yourself with them,
testing their suffering by making it your own!... Oh, I know! The
passions of others, even the saddest, the most poignant, make every one
laugh. Of course! You haven’t ever felt them, or else, accustomed to
mask them (because you are all stuffed with lies), you no longer
recognize them in a poor man like me who can’t hide and control them.’

What a qualification to have to add to the innocent remark that _L’uomo,
la bestia e la virtù_ is a roaring farce and unlike the other plays! It
is certainly unlike them in a technical way, however. For, after a brief
and skilful exposition, it rushes on toward a distant developed
conclusion. In this it differs radically from all the other Pirandello
plays with which I am acquainted. They move backward, rather than
forward. No one has made such an art of exposition as Pirandello.
Perhaps no one before him grasped its possibilities. Remove the
deceitful robe of cleverness, and the exposition of most plays is
revealed as nowise different than in the days when two servants were
disclosed, dusting, and conversing about the imminent return of young
mistress who had been ... etc. There is always the feeling of haste,
that this must be got over with, so that the audience will know where
things stand and the play can begin. Now this is totally unlike real
life (which is what Pirandello is concerned with), where all that has
gone before to create a certain situation is richer and more complicated
than the development of that situation in two hours and a half can
possibly become. Pirandello throws you into the midst of a situation
which you begin to apprehend as interesting (absolutely as things might
be in real life if you entered a room full of people you did not know);
then, as he digs down beneath it, turning up other and other facts that
have gone before, as intensely dramatic; and, finally, as itself almost
the climax. (How magnificently this is done in _Come prima, meglio di
prima_!) In fact, in the best of Pirandello’s plays the exposition is
all but everything. The initial situation, that looked so simple at
first, is revealed at last as only one step this side of the
catastrophe. At the end, that one step forward is taken, and the curtain
falls. Certainly this is true of the almost unbearably painful _Vestire
gli ignudi_ (called, heaven knows why, a comedy!) and of what is perhaps
Pirandello’s masterpiece, _Enrico IV_.

All of the plays are thesis plays. The ‘this-fable-teaches ...’ is
never absent, and there is no doubt that it is with this, the moral,
that Pirandello started. Well, many lesser artists than he have started
out with a moral, and then, blessedly, thrown it overboard half-way on
the voyage. Not Pirandello! He clings to it, worries it, and makes human
sacrifice on its altar. Perhaps he would not do this, were it not, as I
have already suggested, that his theses are always one thesis,
variations on an idea that haunts him. As well as I can make it out (for
it is a perplexing elusive thing), the idea is that illusion is
essential to life, which last, bare and unadorned, would be unendurable.
_Vestire gli ignudi_--clothe the naked. And that all the varieties of
illusion in regard to personality gain, as soon as thought, an objective
life of their own. What am I? I am my naked self, but I am, with equal
truth, my own very different idea of myself, and the varying ideas that
all those who know me have of me. (To say nothing of the different
person I was yesterday and of the still different person I shall be
to-morrow). Each one of these ideas has an objective life of its own,
and gets often in the way of the others; which makes of any individual a
fluctuating insecure complexity. Given this terrifying conception and
its intensity in Pirandello’s mind, _Sei personaggi in cerca d’autore_
is revealed as not in the least a _tour de force_, but as an allegorical
expression of the passionately felt Idea. Pirandello never goes in for
_tours de force_; he is too desperately in earnest.

Now this (I trust I have not done it too much injustice) is extremely
interesting, and plays written around it, with puppets working it out,
would in any case be more stimulating than those written around, say,
Brieux’s thin theses. But the heart-breaking thing is that Pirandello
has genuine creative genius, and that genius and a thesis cannot live
together any better than youth and crabbed age; sooner or later the
former becomes too strong for the latter. He sets out to create
characters that shall prove his point, and, lo! the puppets spring into
real life, become actual men and women, while he, the _burattinaio_,
continues to flog them onward along the path of the Idea. The result is,
in almost every case, an exasperated sense of frustration in the
observer, the conviction that an abstract idea has killed something
true.

Consider the play called _Come prima, meglio di prima_. Here, once
again, you get the now matured idea of a person who is believed to be
dead, but who, living under another name, comes to think of his first
self as real, objective, apart from his living self; something to hate,
or be sorry for, or jealous of. Fulvia has left her husband and their
three-year-old daughter thirteen years since, and gone to the bad. The
reasons for this behaviour are only hinted at, but appear adequate. (One
never doubts the truth of the beginning of a Pirandello play). The
husband, a distinguished surgeon, now discovers Fulvia, who has
attempted to commit suicide in an obscure village _pension_, saves her
life by a brilliant operation, and, to atone for his faults and give her
back her daughter (who has grown up believing her to be dead), takes her
home as his second wife. There, however, she is hated by her own
daughter, Livia, as an interloper and an offence to the memory of the
dead mother. Also Livia soon divines that this step-mother has been no
better than she should be, and, being unable on investigation to find
any evidence of marriage, finally concludes that the woman is merely her
father’s mistress. A noble and tragic situation; a strange case, if you
like, but none the less significant for that, since about it cluster the
intensest human emotions. But how does Pirandello use it? For a thesis
point! When, outraged by the accusation of her own daughter--all the
more that it is an implied insult to the newly-born baby-girl--the wife
breaks loose and tells Livia the truth, ‘Ah, now you can’t stay, now
that you’re alive!’ cries the husband, in effect. ‘If you live, you
can’t stay here; you could only have stayed on condition you remained
dead!’ Fulvia admits this, triumphantly, and goes away with her
month-old child to live in abject poverty with a casual lover from her
old courtesan days, for whom she cares nothing. It is enough to make one
cry with rage--not because it is an unhappy ending, but because it is so
untrue. Why must she go away, just as before, save (_meglio di prima_)
for her child? Once Livia’s illusions about her mother are shattered, is
it any worse for her to live with her mother than without her? There is
nothing noxious to the girl in Fulvia. They _have_ lived together for
the past ten months. Then why? Because Pirandello will have it so for
the sake of his thesis. And _would_ she have gone? Would she have taken
her baby into poverty under the protection of a man who is so close to
being mad that one is never quite sure on which side of the line he
stands? Of course she would not. And her husband is not a bit harder for
her to endure than he has been for the past ten months--less hard,
really, now that she has her baby.

Oh, well, that is always the way with Pirandello. Hardly a one of his
‘inevitable’ situations that could not be solved by a burly Philistine
intrusion of common sense. But at the moment, on the stage, one does not
always perceive this, so patiently and skilfully have the strands of the
thesis been woven together. The worst of it is that in this play, and in
others, not only the final solution is false. (That would be a
comparatively small thing to pardon). Like the camel in the tent,
falsity has been edging its way in almost since the beginning. The
characters reason and subtilize unendurably. Now, in that interesting
supplementary essay to _Il fu Mattia Pascal_, Pirandello replies to the
critics who complained that his characters always reasoned too much and
so were inhuman, that reason is precisely what is human, what men have
over beasts, and that never do men reason so intensely (and whether
rightly or wildly, what does it matter?) as when they suffer, because
they are trying to get at the cause of their suffering. Profoundly true,
without a doubt. So far as I am concerned, I welcome eagerly his
characters’ reasoning or raving--so long as it is theirs. But what his
critics really feel, I think, is that in such plays as _Come prima,
meglio di prima_, _Vestire gli ignudi_, _La vita che ti diedi_, the
characters are often constrained to repeat lifelessly Pirandello’s own
reasoning. And this is doubly unfortunate, since, curiously, they seem
to us to have such an amazing life of their own. For it is an
extraordinary fact that, while you feel Pirandello’s presence in his
plays as the _burattinaio_, as a perhaps rather cruel and disdainful
personality behind the scenes, you never identify him with any of the
characters. Sometimes he talks for them, and then for a little while
their life is suspended, or weakened; for they (and this should delight
him, as a proof of his thesis) are stronger, more alive, than he. They
are terribly alive. Their words (when they are not his words) lay bare
atrociously their throbbing painful emotions. They are so real that I
think I prefer reading the plays to seeing them acted, splendidly built
for the stage though they are, not to have the personalities of the
actors trespass upon those of the characters themselves. What have they
to do with theses? Yes, people do indeed reason when they suffer; but
one recognizes the true note. One knows when it is they who reason, and
when it is only pallid he.

_Enrico IV_, however, I admire without reservation. It seems to me a
very great play indeed, this tragic and terrible story of a young man
who, costumed as the Emperor Henry IV of Germany, is thrown from his
horse during a carnival cavalcade, and suffers a lesion of the brain
which makes him lose his mind and thereafter believe himself the
mediaeval Emperor as whom he was travestied. So, at least, his friends
and relations believe, through the care of one of whom, his nephew, he
has been confined, during the twenty years since his accident, in a
solitary villa magnificently decorated in simulation of the period in
which he fancies himself living, and waited upon by valets in costume
and by four servants employed to represent ‘Secret Counsellors’ of Henry
IV’s. Hither, at the beginning of the play, with a scheme that they hope
may restore his mind, come the woman whom as a young girl he had loved,
her daughter who is a picture of what she then was, her lover the Baron
Belcredi, her daughter’s fiancé, and a doctor. But the truth, which we
learn toward the end of the second act, and the others (save only the
‘Secret Counsellors’) later, is that eight years since, twelve after the
accident, ‘Henry IV’ (no other name is given him in the play) recovered
his mind. But when he came to understand what had happened--that he
himself had grown middle-aged and grey-haired as Henry IV, that there
was no place left for him in the life of others, which had gone on
without him, that the young girl he had nobly loved had married,
coarsened, taken as a lover the odious Belcredi--he resolved not to
return to that life (where, even before his accident, his cynical
worldly acquaintances contemptuously called him mad because he did not
conform to their empty society standards), but to live on in his own
fictitious mediaeval life--no madder than the other. Only now, in a
spasm of disgust for these people coming before him in costume, for the
woman he loved so purely bringing her hateful lover into his presence,
for all the lies, lies, lies, with which, far more than his ‘mad’ life,
their ‘sane’ lives are filled, does he reveal the truth. At the end, the
willed fiction in which he lives is so strong that under its influence
he kills Belcredi.

All this, as I have given it, is the barest, most unsatisfactory sketch.
The play itself is amazingly rich, and it knocks at the foundations of
ready-made ideas until the cheap flamboyant architecture built upon them
totters. In this region between sanity and madness one is, if not closer
to truth, at least further from falsehood, since everything is
questioned. What is reality? what, illusion? what, madness? what,
sanity? what, life itself? ‘All life is crushed by the weight of words,
the weight of the dead. Here am I. Can you seriously believe that Henry
IV is still alive? Yet--see! I speak and give orders to you who are
alive. Does this, too, seem a jest to you--that the dead continue to
govern life? Yes, here it’s a jest; but go out from here, out into the
world of the living. Day is dawning. You think you’ll do what you like
with this day? Yes? You? Customs and traditions! Begin to talk, and
you’ll but repeat words that have always been said. You believe you’re
living. You’re only re-hashing the life of the dead.’

Here in this play one finds the most perfect example of Pirandello’s
great use of exposition and the clearest proof of its value. The entire
tragedy is present from the beginning; the step forward at the end is
almost incidental; the drama lies in the revelation of what was already
there. Yet I know of no other modern play so breathlessly dramatic.
Terror hovers over the darkening room at the end of Act II.

Here, too, obviously, and more richly and completely than ever before,
we have that same haunting thesis. But here it is not forced upon the
characters, but emerges from them. Pirandello doubtless himself means
every word that he makes Henry IV say; but it is Henry IV, not he, who
is speaking--and living. And so vividly real and objective are these
characters that one feels it but a coincidence that the thesis which
emerges from their lives and thoughts is presumably identical with
Pirandello’s own thesis. (A ‘coincidence’ that has never quite happened
before, and that I fear will never quite happen again).

Tremendous as the thesis is, and here an integral part of the drama, it
is not with it that one’s meditations on this extraordinary play end,
but with the characters themselves. Their objectivity is amazing; you
can walk around them. And, almost, one might say, Pirandello has applied
his system of exposition to them, as well as to the plot. For example,
Belcredi is odious; yet he is no monster, but only a revelation of how
odious is the ordinary libertine man-of-the-world. The Marchesa Matilde
is a coarsened embittered wreck of a woman, pathetic because she is
aware of her degeneration; but she is only a revelation of what a lady
of society, who has been capable of something better, becomes. In short,
while there are in this and the other plays strange characters--the
central figure in _Enrico IV_, Marco Mauri in _Come prima, meglio di
prima_, for example--there is a larger number of average people whom we
might, any of us, meet at any time. And it is, I think, Pirandello’s
highest merit that he makes the former entirely credible, and reveals
the significance that we, duller, had not perceived in the latter. A
rare virtue, indeed, in a playwright, who must, we had almost come to
believe, exaggerate his characters to the point of caricature. For this
and for his magnificent development of exposition Pirandello imposes
himself as a really great dramatist, despite his obtrusive thesis and
despite also his unsatisfactory attitude toward life.

What that attitude is, is revealed, curiously, as unmistakably in the
plays as in the short stories or the novels. ‘Curiously,’ because, as I
have said, the characters have so complete a life of their own. One
gets it, of course, in those painful thesis-interims, when not they are
talking, but he; and (one reading the plays) in the stage instructions.
But even this does not quite explain the fact that somehow, oddly, one
is always aware of Pirandello’s presence. He is the puppet-master who
will not be obeyed, looking on at the antics of his rebellious
marionettes with a fastidious distaste, a contemptuous pity. He appears
to have a sick, but not weak, disgust for life. Well, one certainly does
not ask for optimism. Any one who can look upon the world as it has been
revealed to us of late years, and yet flaunt a blithe and hopeful
spirit, deserves only an audience of children. But the attitude one
divines in the bravest seems to be: ‘So _that_ is what humanity
is--humanity of which we are a part! Very well, then; carry on.’ From
Pirandello one gets only the first half of the pronouncement. The end of
all his observation is despair, which is only endurable to us because it
is not weak, but glows with so fierce an anger.




THE FRENCH


Sometimes I think of the French like this:

They are the only civilized grown-up people in the world. Even those who
are ignorant or narrow have a mature attitude toward life, never a raw
schoolboy attitude. They are logical in a world of insanity. For them
not only do 2 plus 2 make 4, but 32 plus 32 make 64--not, as Blasco
Ibañez said of the Russians, 4589. Their minds are orderly, swept and
garnished, clear like their language, to hear which spoken by cultivated
Frenchmen is an exquisite aesthetic pleasure, and to hear which falling
precisely and crisply even from the lips of shopkeepers makes one sigh
with relief at having come away from countries such as America or Italy,
where common speech is a slovenly massacre, and where voices seem
designed for the great open spaces.

Their prose is the marvel of the centuries. Its quality never stales.
The mere flavour of the words on a page of Montaigne or of Anatole
France is delicious. And no one who has learned that their poetry is not
something to be compared with English poetry, but something of a
different kind, will ever deem it thin. Racine thin? Alfred de Vigny
thin?

Whatever thought they touch they clarify, and it is not true that they
do not themselves originate and think creatively. It is only that to
people who think muddily obscurity seems profound and simplicity
superficial.

They have a fine respect for the individual. Nowhere else is the
individual quite so free as in France--free within very broad limits as
to behaviour, almost totally free as to thought. The French are
infinitely less subject to the tyranny of majority opinion than, for
example, the Americans or the Germans. Their minds are not standardized.
‘Equality’ and ‘Fraternity’ may have gone by the board, abandoned as
impracticable ideals, but ‘Liberty’ still means something true in
France: liberty for the individual.

They live soberly, disliking excess, spending less than they earn,
saving for their children, whom they do not, like the Italians, treat as
adorable playthings and cover with kisses and spoil, but educate
sensibly as human beings.

For them marriage is not a reckless juvenile adventure in romance, but a
partnership full of grave responsibilities, of which the woman must bear
her part, as well as the man his; with the result that perhaps nowhere
else does marriage work so well, so fairly, as in France.

And as with marriage, so with the whole of life. The French do not set
for themselves Utopian ideals impossible of realization, the gulf
between which and the actual facts of existence can but end in
disillusioned despair, but reasonable ideals, difficult, indeed, of
attainment, yet not beyond the conceivable reach of struggling mortals.

And yet, and yet ... there is in the French a recurrent touch of madness
that keeps all this from becoming grey and monotonous. The sense of
drama is a clarion call to them. At almost any time they will sacrifice
much that they hold dear for a ringing phrase, a _beau geste_; and they
have more than once staked everything--their patient savings, their
lives, their very national existence--on a noble idea, no whit less
noble if later it proved to be false.

       *       *       *       *       *

And then again I think of the French like this:

They are small and mean and petty. Those periods of exaltation are but
rare raving moments; in all the long hours of their lives the French are
hard and selfish.

Their love of money is a cold terrible passion; acquisition is not for
them, as for Americans, a romance involving recklessness, imagination,
and some other of the virtues to be found in higher adventures, but a
cold, steady, ignoble thing rendering them capable of any baseness, any
cruelty. The Americans gamble for high stakes boyishly, risk everything,
and desire money for the power it brings; the French run no risks, play
safe, and desire money from an ignominious fear of poverty. Their fixed
universal longing is to become _rentiers_. No French government either
dares or desires to tax income adequately. Nor are they generous with
money, like the Americans or like the Italians, though they are rich and
the Italians poor. A French girl may have every quality to fit her to
become an exemplary wife and mother, but unless she has a _dot_ she must
die a spinster.

And as in their love of money, so in a multitude of other ways are the
French small and sordid of spirit.

They are without generosity. They never give something for nothing. And
therefore they are incapable of gratitude.

They will not concede superiority of whatsoever sort to another race,
and when, as at the Olympic Games, this is demonstrated beyond question,
they grow peevish and ill-mannered.

They are narrow. Once having made up their minds they never change them.
Alone among the nations to-day, they will not admit that the Treaty of
Versailles was other than righteous or that the Allies had any share of
responsibility for the war.

They detest Americans because America is rich, Italians because the
Italian race is strong and prolific, the English because England would
leave Germany a nation, and all these and all the others because they
are not French.

They are infinitely more insular than the English. All that they touch
they Frenchify. Read any French romance of ancient Athens or Alexandria,
and you feel yourself at once dishearteningly on the Boulevards. They
know little, and care less, about contemporary life in any other
country than their own. They are smug.

Their press is corrupt to--and beyond--the point of blackmail, and, by
comparison with theirs, American politics are lily-white.

One Frenchman in every five is a government employee. Nowhere else does
there exist so limp, obstructive and deadening a bureaucracy.

In the long run, I find something cheap in their love of thrilling
phrase, of effect, of dramatic climax, because to it they sacrifice
truth. There was something cheap in Victor Hugo, who could write of
Napoleon: ‘This man had become too great. He inconvenienced God.’ There
was something cheap in Napoleon himself. There is a strain of cheapness
in Anatole France.

And, at all times, all of them, all Frenchmen, talk about France.
Englishmen do not perpetually talk about England, nor Americans about
America, but Frenchmen are for ever talking about France. ‘_La France
qui marche à la tête de la civilisation ... la France qui a fait tant de
sacrifices ... la France! la France!_’ It is unendurable.

       *       *       *       *       *

I do not like to think in either of these two ways about the French;
there is too much passion, too much prejudice, in both estimates. I
would like to think of them as I have no difficulty in thinking of the
English or the Italians ... as individuals, good and bad, very mixed.
But I cannot, no matter how many individual Frenchman I meet; for they
will not let me. The truth, I say to myself, should lie somewhere about
half-way between; but, instead, I swing helplessly from one of these two
exasperating estimates to the other and back again, until, in a pet, I
give up for a time thinking about the French at all.

Obnoxiously overdressed as nationality is to-day, one cannot simply
dismiss it, deny its existence or even, I suppose, its importance. The
things that men do and think and feel are the same everywhere, but in
each of certain circles made up of language, climate and, in some slight
degree, race, the angle of approach to these things is, roughly, unified
and somewhat different from that in the other circles. That a man is a
man is far more significant than that he is a Swede or an Englishman;
still, in saying that he is a Swede or an Englishman you _have_ said
something significant about him, you have suggested certain probable
variations (though even then you must be very careful; a Swedish poet
is, in most ways, likely to resemble an English poet more closely than
he resembles a Swedish butcher).

It is difficult and quite fruitless to determine whether in the past
these differences of nationality have been more beneficial than harmful
or _vice versa_. They have been the cause of infinite bloodshed and
misery, but we are also the richer for inheriting, say, both Dutch
painting and Spanish painting. Presumably they are still of some value.
No great poet could write in Esperanto, and German music is composed in
German idiom.

But it is, I think, fair to say that the value of nationality is at the
origin, the bottom. Nationality is like the essential underground roots
of a tree; the tree itself springs up into the universal air. Thus, in
all countries national prejudices are strongest among the uneducated and
the half-educated; whereas the more men become truly cultivated, the
less marked in them become their national differences. There are no
barriers between an intelligent educated American and an intelligent
educated Englishman or Italian; merely subtle distinctions in point of
view that add to the richness of their mutual relationship. Their
nationality is behind them, not with them. Men of genuine cultivation
grow impatient at all this flaunting of nationalism. They find
themselves too similar to men of other countries to believe any longer
in the grosser national generalizations. Indeed, they distrust
generalizations of any sort, and grow more and more inclined to take
everything, fact by fact, as they find it. Thus, as the mature man whose
development has not halted feels an increasing desire to get away from
himself, so, too, does he feel an increasing desire to get away from his
nationality--not, like the petty Anglomaniac or Francophile, into some
other, but into a broader human fellowship. Neither desire can ever be
completely realized, but each is noble--a craving to shake off fetters
of the mind. Perhaps the two desires are really one. When emancipated
men of this sort witness the disagreeable act of some foreigner, it is
to them simply a disagreeable act committed by an individual of faulty
breeding. They do not say, with a shrug: ‘Characteristically Italian,
that, eh?’ or, ‘A Boche is always a Boche.’

That, I fear, is precisely what, with fewer exceptions than among any
other western people, a Frenchman would say--or, at any rate, feel. It
appears, for some reason, extremely difficult for him to emerge from
being a Frenchman into being a man. Perhaps the desire is not very
strong. Far more than the Englishman, whose sense of racial superiority
is currently supposed to be enormous (and is, of course, among the
half-educated, but I am not considering them here), the Frenchman leans
on his nationality for support, assumes its heritage of greatness as his
own. So far as I am aware, no Frenchman has ever written anything
similar to the famous song in _Pinafore_--‘For he himself has said it,
and it’s greatly to his credit, that he is an Englishman, that he
i-i-i-i-i-i-is an Eng-lish-man.’

Doubtless there is some measure of compensation for this willing
narrowness of outlook, even though to-day one can hardly believe in
Emerson’s neat pattern of balance, life appearing to us too confused and
rich. Something of the French sureness, something of the French clarity,
probably derives from the Frenchman’s persistent cultivation of his own
garden and refusal to allow himself to be intrigued by the vast variety
of exotic plants to be found elsewhere. He does know his own garden
better than any of the rest of us know ours. And it is true that wide
acquaintance with the varying minds of many different groups often leads
to sterility, a poised inaction.

Often, but not always. Here it seems to me that the French sacrifice a
possible rare greatness to a moderate average of success. One admires
French achievement for being so French, and yet, even while admiring, is
faintly dissatisfied that it is not something other than that, and
greater. One wearies of so much perfection. It does not seem an adequate
interpretation of a chaotic world. French art is noble; yet it has never
produced a Tolstoy, a Wagner, a Shakespeare, or a Michelangelo. It is
not universal enough; it is too French. At an earlier day, when it was
still but half formed, it came perhaps closest to such heroic stature in
Rabelais.

Probably more than any other one factor, it is their language that cuts
the French off from other peoples and renders them so circumscribed. For
it is, when spoken, very different from other languages. The whole
system of voice production is different. A foreigner with no knowledge
of any language save his own might mistake Spanish for Italian or
Italian for Spanish, but he could not possibly mistake either for
French. Its system of prosody is so different from that of other
related languages that foreign poetry simply cannot be even
approximately translated into French poetry. You can translate
Shakespeare into German or into Italian and hear some echo of the
original sonority--not into French. It is curious that the spoken
language should have developed into this unique isolated instrument,
since written French is extremely like any of the other Latin languages;
but so it is.

There are no worse linguists in Europe than the French. But this may
also be because they care so little about learning foreign languages,
have so little esteem for them, since, while almost any cultivated
Englishman can speak French correctly enough, if often with a pronounced
accent, it is rare indeed to find a cultivated Frenchman who can speak
English with even tolerable ungrammatical fluency. (Shopkeepers and
hotel porters in France of course speak some English, because it is to
their financial advantage to do so). Moreover, even a literary knowledge
of other languages is rare among the French. When reputable English or
Italian authors have occasion to insert a French sentence in a novel,
the sentence is usually correct; a French author can seldom so much as
quote a foreign phrase correctly. Paul Morand, who, I believe, has spent
many years in the Diplomatic Service, and whose brilliant cosmopolitan
short stories do reveal interest in the national characteristics of
other people, is frequently guilty of solecisms in the foreign phrases
he now and then employs. In Henri Béraud’s excellent historical novel,
_Le Vitriol-de-Lune_, the principal character is an Italian who is
called, throughout the book, ‘Guiseppe,’ though Giuseppe is one of the
commonest Italian names. Alone among the contemporary French writers
with whose work I am acquainted, André Maurois reveals a genuine
knowledge of English. And it is significant that he, too, is practically
alone in revealing a genuine sympathetic understanding of the English
people. _Les Silences du Colonel Bramble_ occasionally crosses the line
into national caricature; but it is at least caricature based on
knowledge, not wild unrelated caricature like Abel Hermant’s. As for
_Ariel_, a work of far greater importance--well, written by an Italian,
it would have been, if surprising, at least credible, since there are
many Italians who love and understand Shelley; written by a Frenchman,
it appears little short of miraculous. Nor is this solely a personal
judgment of my own, employed for the sake of my thesis. English critics
fairly gasped with amazement at _Ariel_. But I repeat that André Maurois
stands alone. You would have to go back to Taine to find any similarly
lonely figure.[2]

So, reluctantly, I end, as I began, with those two irreconcilable, but I
think equally justified, estimates of the French--save that each has at
the moment lost something of its intensity for me through the relief of
putting it into written words.

It will not be the French who will overthrow the barriers between races,
sacrifice their nationality to something broader and greater, or conduct
the League of Nations to a position of supreme importance. True, there
are those moments of national madness when it is as though the French
were atoning for all their habitual narrowness. But one cannot say:
‘Come, let us now have a moment of madness.’ No, for the achievement of
unselfish uncircumscribed ideals the world will have to depend on
individuals who in their growth have gradually sloughed off all that is
narrow, restrictive and myopic in their nationality. Such individuals
have come in the past, and should come increasingly in the future, from
many different peoples--hardly from the French.

On the other hand, even though we may feel that nationality is
narrowing, and that at best it should be only a means to an end, we may
nevertheless be actually grateful that the French have made it an end in
itself. The similar devotion to it of the Poles arouses principally
distaste; in the French we not only excuse but admire it. For there is
about it in their case, and in their case alone, something akin to the
results of intensive cultivation in agriculture, something that the best
minds of other races must sacrifice (rightly, I think) to broader
results--a perfection, an orderliness of thought, a fine neat
thoroughness, incapable of achievement in any other way than through
this persistent nurture of nationality, and to the contemplation of
which we can always turn with pleasure.




PORNOGRAPHY


The abridged edition of the Oxford Dictionary, which is the only
dictionary within my reach at present, defines pornography as (1)
‘description of manners, etc., of harlots’ (an etymological definition
that the word has long since outgrown); and (2) ‘treatment of obscene
subjects in literature; such literature.’ Looking up ‘obscene,’ I find
‘lewd’; looking up ‘lewd,’ I find ‘lascivious’; and looking up
‘lascivious,’ I find ‘lustful; inciting to lust.’ (Is there something
especially wicked about the Ls?) So the definition finally appears as
‘literature treating of subjects inciting to lust.’

Now I have nothing at all against dictionaries. I find them entertaining
reading, pithy, diversified, pleasantly alliterative, well informed but
never tedious. Indeed, appreciation of the dictionary is growing
steadily. Its influence on the arts is strong and increasing. In
literature, as far back as E. F. Benson’s _Dodo_ it could be faintly
discerned, while to-day it shines unmistakably in such books as Compton
Mackenzie’s _Sylvia Scarlett_ or in any novel by Stephen McKenna. As for
the movies, they are fairly suffused with the spirit of the dictionary.
For example, a two-dimensioned heroine is going to make a visit. You
see her enter her motor car, ride in her motor car, descend from her
motor car. From what does such bright thoroughness derive if not from
the thoroughness and inevitable logic of the dictionary? Predictable;
prediction; predictive(ly). Nevertheless, the dictionary is imperfect.
For it defines only the literal meaning of a word, which is less than
half its significance. All valuable words grow hazy with connotation,
and this luminous haze becomes a true part of their meaning. What sort
of definition is ‘sprite or goblin of Arabian tales’ for ‘genie’? In
fact, there are a number of words that to a great many people mean
nothing _but_ their connotation, the haze that has risen around them;
‘Bolshevism,’ for instance.

This emanation or glow or haze about words infinitely enriches language;
it makes poetry possible. But one does not always want to use language
emotionally; often one desires merely to express accurately a prosaic
thought. Then the richness clogs one. It is as though a commercial
traveller in olive oil, setting out to go from Naples to Smyrna, were to
find himself not traversing the eastern Mediterranean, but adrift on the
confused enchanted sea of Odysseus. Mediaeval saints frequently had
visions of the Madonna that rendered them ecstatic with joy. But the
celestial light that shone from her face was so dazzling that they were
seldom able to give any satisfactory account of her features.

Thus with words. Thus with ‘pornography.’ ‘Literature treating of
subjects inciting to lust’ is no explanation of the shuddering sense of
evil, arousing a desire to cross oneself, that the word evokes. Good
gracious! we have all listened to dirty stories--in the smoking-room of
Pullman cars if we are men, at our finishing schools if we are
women--and, whether interested or bored, we certainly felt no shuddering
sense of evil. The truth is that the connotation, the emotional
significance, of a word may be so different from its original prosaic
meaning as almost to kill the thing the word purports to define. This
has happened in the case of ‘pornography.’ So powerful is the maleficent
exhalation of the name that it has, if not actually destroyed the thing
itself, at least repressed and stultified it. It is a pity; for
pornography is capable of becoming, and, despite its handicap, has at
times in the employ of skilful writers become, one of the most delicate
of minor arts. By our terrified taboo we keep it out of the hands of
artists, and so a gross and especially a childish thing at the primitive
level of the coarse words scrawled on latrines by little boys.

This is all the more unfortunate since there are certain fine and
fastidious artists who are at their best when writing pornographically.
Sterne was one. Norman Douglas and James Branch Cabell are examples
to-day. _South Wind_ contains some of the daintiest pornography ever
written, done in so candid and virginal a way that to read it is like
hearing a girl of seventeen say sweetly to a group of her parents’
friends: ‘I always tell my mother everything.’ As for _Jurgen_, its
pornographic passages are as fresh and delightful as the _Contes
Drolatiques_ themselves. I have no patience (and I dare say Mr. Cabell
has none) with those persons who defend _Jurgen_ by denying that it is
pornographic, and I have still less patience with those who assert about
any book of the kind that it is not pornographic, but teaches a great
moral lesson. No doubt there are dull inferior books that ‘treat the
phenomena of sex very frankly’ and thereby ‘teach a great moral lesson’;
but they bear no relation to pornography, which is either an art in
itself or nothing.

‘Literature treating of subjects inciting to lust.’ H’m ... I fear the
dictionary has failed us all around. For the definition is not only
inadequate but inaccurate. Oh, it will hold, I suppose, for the lowest
forms of pornography--for, say, certain passages in Smollett’s
_Ferdinand Count Fathom_ or in Richardson’s nasty _Pamela_. (It is a
significant fact that the authors of such primitively and grossly
pornographic books as these nearly always protest that they are not
pornographic, but teach that ‘great moral lesson’ referred to above,
whereas the authors of first-rate grown-up pornography take pride in
their calling). But when one progresses beyond such elementary
pornography, which can be of interest only to children or to men with
the minds of children, the definition collapses. Really good
pornography for grown-ups simply does not ‘incite to lust.’ For example,
I read with delight the conversation between Jurgen and the Hamadryad
(and if that is not pornography, and of the best, then I don’t know what
pornography is, and had better give up trying to write about it), but it
did not give me a desire to go downstairs and assault the cook. It is
probably true that to a person incapable of desire for the opposite sex
such a passage as this would be without interest, but the passage itself
does not incite desire; it plays mentally with the idea of the emotion.
In short, one must be capable of desire in order to like pornography,
but that liking itself is something quite different from desire. Jurgen,
you may remember, though scarcely a weakling, soon wearied of the
conscientious perversities of his wife, Anaitis, but he loved to get off
by himself in her magnificent pornographic library (the run of which I
envy him) and _read_ about such things. That is profoundly true and
illuminating.

The history of civilization is the history of man’s effort to enrich the
simple world he was presented with. He transforms handsome but
monotonous primeval forests into complicated cities furnished with
bathrooms and radios; he builds music up from a few primitive sounds to
the elaborate symphony; in eating he progresses from the rending of raw
meat and the consumption of wild berries to a dreamy dinner at
Paillard’s. And you may be sure that he would have done the same with
the sex-relationship had he been able. Alas, there he was baffled! The
facts of sex are immutably simple. There are so few things that one can
do. Heroic efforts have been made to increase on these, but, though many
men have given their whole lives to the cause, without avail. New meats
and vegetables for the table were continually being invented or
discovered--_foie gras_, the grapefruit, the alligator pear; no
satisfactory new ways of love were possible. Even so, man was not
defeated. On the contrary, he won a great moral victory. The facts of
sex were unalterably simple, but the atmosphere of thought and emotion
surrounding those facts he discovered to be a luxuriant tropical forest.
Three thousand years of thrilling exploration have not exhausted its
richness or exorcized its dangers--for the forest breeds monsters as
well as gods, and men have been lost and have gone mad there. In fact,
in this rich region one may find anything one looks for (besides
startling surprises), from harpies to shapes of serene loveliness. It is
a Swiss-Family-Robinson kind of forest, save for the delightful
uselessness of the discoveries.

To this world pornography belongs. But it is not an earnest-minded art,
and so does not concern itself with either the beauties or the horrors,
both of which its mocking, reasonable, eighteenth-century nature finds
excessive, but with all the minor mysteries of the wood--the fantastic
tricks and illusions, the dainty mischievous sprites, the malicious
imps who make faces from behind trees then vanish with a burst of clear
laughter.

This gay hide-and-seek elusiveness is the precise spirit of pornography.
It is always saying one thing while pretending to say another. Why the
pretence of something to be something else is art, I don’t profess to
know, and of course it is not great art. But pornography lays no claim
to be anything but one of the minor arts--and that is what the minor
arts all do. In architecture it is no doubt a mistake for a railway
station to look like a cathedral, but in fine cooking it is proper for a
potato to look like a rose. So--perhaps even especially--with
pornography. For it must be remembered that those few facts of sex from
which pornography derives are solid, stern and tragically intense. So
there is all the more reason why pornography, playing delicately above
them, but bound to them none the less, should adopt every possible
artifice to display its iridescent lightness. Almost alone among the
arts, it runs no danger in this--as does poetry or painting; it can
never become thin or empty, since its feet are anchored in those eternal
facts. The Siegfried theme beneath the leaping flickering fire-music.
Given this foundation (to say nothing of the stupid opposition to the
art), it is amazing what delicacy pornography has, at its best,
achieved. But that is of course the point. The difficulties of working
in such material explain the appeal the art makes to those fine and
fastidious artists who practise it.

There must be some reason beyond the mere sound of a word for the
popular horror of pornography; and, in fact, as soon as one begins to
dig down, one discovers all sorts of reasons, such as they are. There
is, for example, especially in America, a buried remnant of puritanism,
which makes people feel obscurely that something is wrong with anything
conveying such intense pleasure as the sexual relation, which therefore
should be considered morosely, if at all, and should certainly not be
made the starting point for all sorts of agreeable fancies. (It is only
fair to add that most of the people who feel this would deny quite
sincerely that they feel it; nevertheless, they do). More obscure than
this objection, but probably even more potent, is another, based on the
average individual’s inharmonious attitude toward the whole question of
sex. He has been taught, and holds firmly, that the sexual relation is a
grave and sacred thing to be celebrated as a holy married rite; but,
considering himself honestly, he perceives that it is, instead, a wild
physical ecstasy with nothing of grave and little that is perceptibly
sacred. Desiring to be honest, he is baffled and exasperated by the
contradiction between what he thinks and what he feels, and it is
probably this which makes him avoid explaining the facts of sex to his
children. He is right about this emotionally; it is an indication of
moral integrity for which he should be admired, rather than censured.
How in the world can he explain the sexual relation to his sons as
something grave and sacred when he knows in his heart that it is not
that at all? Pornography stirs up and intensifies this latent discomfort
in him. Gambolling about and impudently joking, it obviously considers
sex neither as something grave and sacred (which he is convinced is the
way it ought to be considered, at least publicly) nor yet with the
shrinking fear due it, if it is, as he knows it to be, a shattering
earthquake among emotions. It is as though pornography were sticking out
its tongue at him personally. He is upset by it.

Among more maturely self-conscious persons, who, knowing more about
themselves, care less, the sole objection to pornography is one of
taste, and is felt only for its grosser primitive forms.

Now it is true that good taste is not a creative thing, but even
something of a drag. Great art frequently violates it, and forces
subsequent modifications of its criteria. But for minor art, and by and
large in the world, taste is valuable. It tends to level things down to
a standard--but it only tends. Good taste preserves the amenities. It is
taste that makes existence agreeable; with life it has little to do.
Used with discretion, it is of great service. For instance, good taste
objects to violent noise, violent smells and all monstrous deformities;
and while it is true that what at first hearing sounds as violent noise
may be made by a Stravinsky, and what at first appears a monstrous
deformity be created by a Baudelaire, most noises and deformities are
really such, and deserving of suppression. Anyway, no permanent harm is
done by good taste; it cannot crush genius. Aristophanes was unable to
demolish Euripides. Good taste objects to emotional unrestraint, whether
at a prize fight or at a religious revival. It aims at moderation in
everything; and the proof that moderation is not fatal to achievement is
that the Greeks professed to love it beyond all else.

Especially, taste is averse to anything that inspires disgust, the most
sterile and desolate of all emotions. Now there are certain things that
almost universally inspire disgust--why, it does not matter; they do.
The odour of hydrogen-dioxide, for instance, goitres, or a disfigured
human face. And in gross unworthy pornography there are brutal or
distorted forms that do so for most of us: _Le Rideau Levé_, the Marquis
de Sade’s _Justine_, or Cleland’s _Memoirs of Fanny Hill_. These offend
against taste. They do not in a mature man arouse a shuddering sense of
horror, but they do arouse disgust, which is a much worse sensation. But
it would be as absurd to condemn all pornography on account of these
books as to condemn all music on account of ‘Yes, We Have no Bananas.’

It is to be noted that books such as those I have just cited are not
really sophisticated; they are unaware of the mental richness enveloping
the facts of sex. This is as true of De Sade’s novels, for all the
complicated aberrations they record, as of Cleland’s puerile story. They
concern themselves solely with the facts, and are still at the stage of
trying to increase the number of these, whereas the aim of civilized
pornographers is to get away from those monotonous facts into a richer
region. A common trick among lesser pornographers is to hint
mysteriously that the facts are more numerous than they really are. For
example, in an absurd novel by Catulle Mendès, the author, after
describing with wearisome detail what the hero and his mistress did
together (which was pretty much all of the little that _can_ be done),
sends them out into the night. ‘When they returned,’ he says, ‘they did
not dare look at each other; they had committed the unforgivable sin;
henceforth they were cut off from humanity’--or words to that effect. A
puerile and ridiculous piece of bravado. One cannot alter the facts or
stare them out of countenance. In truth, it is intolerable to stare at
them at all. The sexual act itself, while thrilling to the two
concerned, must be depressing and even faintly revolting to a mentally
adult observer of it--in part because the violent unrestrained
expression of any emotion is distasteful (I can still remember with a
touch of nausea Mrs. Leslie Carter in _Zaza_), but chiefly because such
a spectacle can only remind us drearily of the elementary paucity of
those facts on which all life is constructed. I am told that there are
sordid resorts in Paris, where, for a price, one may gaze through a
peep-hole at this primitive exhibition. It is incredible to me that any
one should want to. I should go home and weep. ‘“Dust and ashes!” so you
creak it ... what’s become of all the gold ...?’ There are enough barren
unsought-for moments, God knows! when all life seems but a skeleton
affair, unendurably indigent--merely greed, hunger, passion, passion,
hunger, greed--without one’s deliberately going in search of others.

In a way it is a shame that we cannot permit the movies to become
appreciably pornographic. Still, we cannot. As a virtuous man I admit
that at once. Pornographic books and spectacles seem to do something
physiologically harmful to immature boys and girls, and while we can
(possibly) keep such books out of their hands, we cannot forbid children
the movies, which are obviously made for them. Appealing only to the
eye, the cinema could not, anyway, achieve such richness as can
literature; still, some very pretty pornographic effects might be
obtained. Even with the heavy-handed censorship and the determination of
producers to run no risks, something now and then slips through. I
remember a delightful film in which Miss--no, I had better not mention
her name, because perhaps she or her press-agent might assert that the
film taught a great moral lesson, and sue me--in which the heroine, when
wearing a scandalously alluring bathing suit, paused for a full minute,
arms upstretched, before diving--because the water was cold. Later,
there was a lovely scene in which the heroine, in the daintiest of
nightgowns, was surprised in her bedroom by a young man. The beauty of
this scene was that neither he nor she was thinking any harm, both being
absorbed in the solution of I forget what innocent problem, whereas the
audience, including myself, was thinking all the thoughts that pretty
girls in bedrooms normally arouse; just as in the bathing picture the
heroine was convincingly thinking about the chill of the water, while we
were not. This was really good pornography--something pretending to be
something else.

Delight in the pretence of something to be something else is not in
itself a sophisticated emotion; it is, like most others, a primitive
emotion capable of great sophistication. If you find it in the ceiling
decorations of the Settecento, where frescoes are mockingly made to look
like architectural reliefs, you also find it in the humblest Italian
houses, where an outer wall is grossly painted to represent a window
with a blind half-open and a woman looking out. For that matter, you
find it--or might have found it thirty years ago--in the American
folding-bed (in which incarnation it was certainly not art--not even
minor art). This extraordinary piece of furniture really solved no
problem of space (a couch would have done that much better), and
existed, for a time, solely because it was something pretending to be
something else. It disappeared, partly because it was uncomfortable, but
chiefly because it did not keep its promise, since the most ingenuous
observer could never possibly have mistaken it for a sideboard or a
chest of drawers. Children themselves rejoice in examples of this
pretence.

It is well that this is so, that the emotion is primitive, since thus,
even when the pretence of something to be something else is refined upon
and made acceptable to civilized adults, a fresh youthful quality
inspires it. One’s delight in words that say one thing while pretending
to say another, is not at all due to a sense of one’s own cleverness in
detecting the real meaning, and is only in part due to the richness
created by the allusions and by thinking of two things at a time; there
is, besides, that gay light-hearted relish of pretence. Nothing, for
example, is more delightful than a conversation with a woman whom one
does not really desire--well, at least not very much--that is all made
up of very risky _sous-entendus_ (and the riskier they are, the daintier
they must become), leading to nothing at all, indulged in for their own
sake.

Precisely this is what pornography does. It plays about the idea of sex
with all the art and wisdom and trained fancy of experience--but _it
plays_. Good pornography is always gay, which is the more to its credit
since the subject it is being gay about is so grim. We should welcome
such gaiety, not suppress it.




SUCCESS


It is sometimes hard to divine what a certain period in the past was all
about, what its principal aim was, if indeed it had one. But the
retrospective investigator of some hundred years hence will surely have
no difficulty in discovering what our period was about. Discarding
(since we assume him to be intelligent) whatever we may have produced of
permanent and therefore universal and therefore uncharacteristic of any
single epoch, he will devote himself to our ephemeral literature, once
the last word in modernity, in his day totally forgotten, but preserved
in the British Museum and the Congressional Library. He will also, to
even better effect, pore delightedly over such bound volumes of our
weekly and monthly magazines as he can obtain. And he will know with a
most beautiful certainty that what our period was about was Success.

We can hardly miss the fact ourselves, since our novels do little but
exalt success or revile it, and our magazines glorify it, and all our
advertisements canonize it. We live in a utilitarian epoch (it is
possible that this has been said before), and results are what people
demand.

Well, results are surely important, and if one sets out for results it
is of no interest, or of little, why he fails to obtain them. The fable
known as _A Message to Garcia_ is admirably typical of the spirit of the
age we live in.

_A Message to Garcia_, if devoured eagerly by half a world, was an
American fable. It is, in fact, America (however resentful older
countries feel about this) that more and more sets the pace and the
standard to-day. And possibly it is just the ability to succeed (less
characteristic of the mass of Americans than they would have us believe,
but at any rate characteristic of what they would like to be) which is
most influencing the rest of the world.

The admirable things about success are so obvious as hardly to demand
mention. Courage, determination, impatience with ineffectiveness and
vacillation, refusal to acknowledge defeat, and a kind of drastic
simplification of the facts, are among the virtues inherent in the
doctrine.

It is, however, equally obvious that if nothing is to matter but
success, the attainment of results, the results for which everything is
thus sacrificed, and for which innumerable complex side-issues are swept
away, must be of the highest importance. Yet extraordinarily little of
the energy and intelligence so lavishly employed appears to be directed
toward ascertaining the quality of the results to be striven for. That
is assumed almost as a matter of course. All the magnificent effort is
devoted to achieving them. It is as though in the midst of a terrific
blizzard, with the roads impassable and no trains running, people all
about me were to say: ‘It is very important that you should go somehow
from New York to New Haven and buy a certain kind of lead-pencil made
only there,’ and I should reply, though my lips were white: ‘Yes, it is
very important that I should go get that lead-pencil made only in New
Haven,’ and then should, in fact, at the risk of my life, make that
journey on foot through snow-drifts--and procure the pencil. But the
oddest thing of all would be if then New York and New Haven were both to
ring with my praises, and there were not a soul, not even half-dead me,
to ask whether a lead-pencil was really worth all that effort.

Well, any sustained heroic effort is admirable for its own sake. We
quite properly admire explorers of poisonous forests and climbers of
difficult peaks, even when there is little of value to be obtained by
their reaching their goal. Yes, but this particular merit has nothing to
do with the matter, but, indeed, runs counter to it, is one of those
side-issues to be brushed away. ‘Results! Get results!’ is the cry.
There is no way out of it: if the cry has significance it can only be
because the results are important.

I wonder whether they are. The quality of our current civilization does
not appear especially high. There is a cheapness about it that was
lacking not only in more leisurely epochs, such as the first half of the
eighteenth century, but also in others as fervent as this. The same
splendid intensity of effort pervaded the civilization of the
Renaissance as pervades our own; yet the quality of the former
civilization was incomparably finer than that of ours. Since the energy
is equally admirable in either period, it can only be the nature of the
results striven for that renders one period fine and the other cheap.
Neither do I think that this was because the Renaissance was All for Art
and Art for All (a thesis of which I am profoundly sceptical), whereas
our own is--what it is. No, one cannot dismiss current civilization
loftily by calling it ‘money-getting.’ When did people not desire
money--all the money they could possibly get? Read the letters of great
painters of the Renaissance. Their social status was equivocal, and
their demands were difficult to enforce, but they drove the hardest
bargains they could, and cared every bit as much for money as do modern
realtors. The problem goes deeper than that.

What is this success, for which all are striving with magnificent
energy, to achieve which brings wide acclaim, and to fail of achieving
which relegates one to contemptuous indifference? As I have suggested,
it is not merely money-making. We, too, have our artists, and (a more
important fact) in business itself, to which most men turn perforce,
there are other aims than just that one. To build up a flourishing
business from a decrepit one results of course in money-making, must be
tested by money-making; but it is the building-up, rather than the
financial profit, that is recognized as success.

‘Recognized as success.’ Here we are getting warm. The recognition is
essential. You cannot in our modern American-led civilization be a
success without being recognized as one. And recognized by whom? By
majority opinion. In other words, it is not sufficient that a small
heterogeneous minority, who more or less understand the kind of thing
you are trying to do, should consider you to have succeeded. The
recognition must come from the large homogeneous majority. A man may do
something sensitive and significant in one of a dozen fields, but unless
he obtains this recognition he is set down as a failure.

Here is part of the trouble. For majorities are always wrong--except
when they are right for the wrong reasons. (Not a maxim of my own, but
of Time’s). It is invariably a minority that is right. But there are
many minorities, with as many varying minds, and most of them prove in
the long run as hopelessly wrong as the majority itself. There was once
a minority that considered Oscar Wilde a very great author, and another
that thought Rossetti a very great painter. True, there is always a
minority that turns out to have been right--I mean, what the centuries
simmer down to approximate ‘right’--on whatever subject was in question;
but how to recognize it--the more as it is a heterogeneous minority?

Fortunately, one does not have to. Even a minority is too much. There is
one, and only one, judge of true success: the man who has succeeded--or
failed. He is corrupted by vanity, he may desire avidly the acclaim of
the multitude, he is full of falsities and pretences, but, all alone by
himself, he has moments of clairvoyance when he knows, as no one else
ever can, whether he has succeeded or failed in what he tried to do, and
just how significant his success was, or how wretched his failure.

In this lies the difference between the Renaissance (or any other period
of fine quality--I have no special brief for the Renaissance) and our
own period. Then it was the individual who finally decided what was
worth while. True, in the arts (to which one turns because after so many
centuries they are what chiefly remains to us of the period) there was,
perhaps, an unusually sensitive, intelligent and powerful minority
opinion; but did the artists very much heed that opinion? Not they! It
was not good enough. Throughout all his life Leonardo experimented. What
did he care for the judgment of the minority?

We have come a long way from that point of view to-day. Success is no
longer success without the sanction of the majority. More than that, at
bottom, success _is_ that sanction.

It is difficult to feel this condition of affairs as other than harmful.
For while standardization of dress and behaviour are negligible evils,
standardisation of thought comes pretty close to being the end, the
abject death, of thought.

Take, too, that simplification of the facts, which I have mentioned as
one of the essentials to modern success. Up to a certain point, and if
the aim sought is worth while, it is admirable. The world is altogether
too ‘full of a number of things’ not to demand their simplification for
the attainment of a single purpose. Some of them must be lopped off. But
the larger your majority, the more primitive the simplicity it demands,
and the more drastic the pruning. It cuts off living branches along with
the dead. Even so, if its aim were only significant! But what it is
trying to do is to make a flag-staff out of an umbrella pine. An
infinite number of instances, all richly different, capable of a hundred
diverse developments--and the majority wants them all the same: one
meagre jejune type that it can understand. A forest of flag-staffs!

Yet drill and organize them as we may, this sorry but infinitely
exciting world continues, and will continue to eternity, to be made up
of some hundreds of millions of individuals, each one, if we will let
him be, blessedly different from all the others. Therefore, the effect
on these of our present standards of success cannot conceivably be
permanent. Neither, one surmises, can the standards themselves. But for
the time being, while they endure, the effect is disastrous.

It is not only that the results of our civilization, by which it will be
known to future generations, are essentially cheap. They, the future
generations, will, it is to be hoped, accomplish other and better
things. There is plenty of time. It is also that a finer, truer, if less
transmittable form of success is rare to-day: I mean, the full, free,
robust development of the individual, whether gifted or not. This, not
objective results, is what it seems to me success should mean. If the
individual is very gifted, his development will, indeed, bring with it
results that may influence men even after his death; but that is by the
way, the merest side-issue. It is not, in fact, about the very gifted
individual that I am chiefly concerned. However unduly hampered, he will
thrust his head up eventually into the free open air; he will develop
somehow in his own way, despite majority opinion. But the man with one
talent will go bury it in the ground. Every one will tell him he ought
to, and he will readily see that he ought to himself. ‘Good Lord, man!
Talents went out with the fall of the Roman Empire! Can you _buy_
anything with a talent? Just so much dead weight. Some day when you’re
in a hurry, carrying it about will mean just those two seconds or
difference that will make you miss the eight-twelve train to business.
Has Jones got a talent? Have I got one? Go bury it quick!’

At first glimpse, this majority-ruled civilization appears a terribly
strong, ruthless machine. Conform or be damned! Is it not akin to the
stern puritanism of the early New England colonies? So a number of
writers deem it, and therefore hate it, and cry out desperately against
it. I am not so sure. Its results are, indeed, thin and cruel, but I am
unable to see it as that fearful Juggernaut; the legend of its harsh
strength leaves me unconvinced. For what is this majority opinion to
which all must bow?

If a hundred million people really thought alike, it would be possible,
even probable, that they were right. Not right, of course, on
specialized subjects such as the doctrine of Relativity, the achievement
and failures of Cubist painting, or the merits and defects of the
Federal Reserve banking system, since these are matters which only a
comparative few have the ability and training to understand, but
tolerably right on the universal problems common to all men. But have we
in America (which I take only as a symbol) a hundred million people who
really think alike? We have not. We have not got a hundred million
people who think at all. When you overhear pert snappy retorts hurled by
waitresses or shop-girls at impudent young men, or quick lines got off
by flappers at country-club dances, do you imagine that such crackling
wit spatters spontaneously from these young ladies’ alert brains? Then
you must indeed be out of touch with our civilization. Gleaned from the
comic strips, echoed from the dialogues of vaudeville, its aim not to be
original but the very latent thing. ‘You poor fish’--or ‘prune’ would
be a hopelessly bad retort, being yesterday’s slang; ‘Wet smack’ (at the
moment I write) a good one, being to-day’s.

Rising to higher matters, do you fancy that a hundred million Americans
calling in chorus for the Americanization of immigrants, the
conservation of the Nordic Race, and the election of Calvin Coolidge,
signifies that the hundred million have reached their belief in the
desirability of these things through processes of thought? Nonsense! A
few individuals have patiently, cleverly, and with deadly repetition
told them dramatically about these things in words of one syllable; and
they have taken up the cry immensely, much as an insensate mountain
hurls back tumultuous echoes of a single slender voice.

Thus considered, what becomes of this majority opinion? It is revealed
as, at bottom, itself only a very small minority opinion. And such a
minority! An idea to be apprehended virtually without thought must be so
simple that in a complex world it can have no more relation to truth
than Rollo of the Rollo books had to a human boy; and since it must, to
appeal, be melodramatic, it must also be cheap. From a few score
individuals, all appallingly cheap, superficial and incompetent, from
the Northcliffes, the Edward Boks, the Lloyd Georges of the world,
springs this dread majority opinion. In personal contact they cannot for
a moment hold their own with men of real ability, and are considered by
these with disdain or, more often, with careless amusement, for they are
without quality, and their thought is too superficial to deserve the
name; but they have a knack of charlatanry (though mostly they are not
intelligent enough to know it for this, but fancy themselves inspired
voices of God--_vox populi, vox Dei_) which enables them to get across
to the multitude their tawdry ideas and ideals.

Strong, a civilization based on the thinking of such mountebanks? A
single clear truth, ringingly expressed, would slay it; though no doubt
it would yet go along for some time, not knowing it had been hurt, like
the neatly decapitated giant of the fairy-tale, till something shook it
and its head tumbled off.

The conception of success is a good deal better than most of the pabulum
on which these masters of a civilization feed the multitude, presumably
because in this case a not inconsiderable portion of the majority have
devoted some thought to the matter and evolved from it a sort of
philosophy. There _are_ those merits about what they mean by success.
But, with truly Northcliffian repetition, I insist that if success is
the ideal, it can be judged only by its results. If what is meant by
success is good, then its results will be good. That is no more than
saying the same thing twice in one sentence.

What are its results? Oh, not any longer on ‘civilization.’ That is too
big and vague a word. Let us descend happily to the concrete, to the
only indivisible reality. Estimate the results of success on
individuals, enough individuals, and you will then, and only then, have
a true test of its value.

No one can do this honestly save through his own personal experience,
through his own sincere and careful estimates of other human beings.
Obviously, any one man can know but a few of his fellows--so few that it
is risky work drawing conclusions from that knowledge. Moreover, his own
personal traits limit the amount and kind of knowledge he can, even so,
acquire, and render his conclusions dubious. Yet, so far as I can see,
there is no other way. So I will take my experience, and do you take
yours.

Have you ever known an individual who appeared to you the better for
having achieved popular acclaim, recognition in the great world of
majority opinion,--success? I have not. I have never known any one whom
it had not--or so I truly felt--at least a little harmed. Something of
fineness and brave integrity was gone from the best of them. One could
not any longer quite safely say to any one of them: ‘Just there what
you’ve done is poor, unworthy of you,’ and have him fight the accusation
out on its merits. Suppose the man a writer. Expressed or not, there
arose unmistakably to his mind the thought: ‘A hundred thousand readers
have not found it so. That very passage has been praised in a score of
reviews.’ It is not a question of whether he or his accuser is right; it
is the matter of the harm that has been done to the man’s
open-mindedness. Of value only as himself, he has become a sort of
institution. And institutions are at once absurd and distressing,
whether they are the Harvard Commencement, _The New Republic_, Doney’s
restaurant in Florence, or successful individuals.

Among all the men I have known, the ones whom I have most deeply
esteemed were men to whom no imaginable stretching of the popular
conception would concede success. But I think that what they have,
diversely, achieved is precisely what success ought to mean, since it
has benefited, not harmed, their character.

But the final saddest note of this homily remains to be sounded. The
worst thing--and also the strangest--is not the evil effect of success
on the individual who succeeds; for vanity and self-satisfaction are
universal human traits easy to arouse, and, if deplored, should be
readily pardoned. Moreover, an individual who has achieved success, as
success is counted to-day, is likely to be of too poor quality to waste
many tears over. No, the worst thing of all is the effect the success of
an individual has on other individuals, even intelligent. Hardly ever
can they see him as they saw him before; they cannot now meet him quite
on an equality; they are a little humble, slightly awed (though they may
disguise the emotion beneath pertness or cynicism). For he has been
sanctioned, he has been anointed, he has been canonized.

And, dear heaven! when one thinks of how and by whom, one is oppressed
by a sense of desolation beyond even the ministerings of the Ironic
Spirit.




BLACK-AND-WHITE


More than other peoples we Americans have faith in
short-cuts--short-cuts to health, happiness, knowledge, and, of course,
success. I can remember a period when the one passionate avocation of
American life appeared to be the search for the Perfect Breakfast Food.
If only it could be found, the problems of existence would at once be
solved; through its daily consumption not only would the body become
strong and beautiful, but the soul, too, one felt, would be healed, and
all at last be indeed right with the world. Then anaemic monthly
magazines were enriched with illustrated advertisements of a hundred
strange breakfast foods, the inventor--no, discoverer--of each of which
claimed, and perhaps believed, that in it he had found that perfect one.
Some swore by this one, some by that; but all felt secretly that they
had not yet found exactly IT, but that IT was there somewhere, just
around the corner, waiting for them. There was such fervour in the quest
that it was not even vulgar; it had a mystical side, like the mediaeval
search for the philosopher’s stone. And so, for a while, millions every
morning ate, hopefully, reverently, religiously, weird concoctions--of
flax-seed, of malt, of hops, of every known grain, kernels shot through
a gun, kernels exploded by incredible heat--until at last in a
nation-wide wave of indigestion the quest collapsed, like the Crusades.

It was a striking phenomenon, and, like all great, popular, idealistic
movements, faintly pathetic; but it does not stand alone. Before it,
history tells, there had been a period of even more dangerous faith in
patent medicines, and, since, there has been who does not know
what?--starvation, careful mastication, Coué-ism, and a score of other
short-cuts to health and happiness. Living abroad and returning to
America every two or three years, I am always struck, on arrival there,
by two things: first, that the one great secret of life has been
discovered; second, that the secret of year-before-last has been
forgotten as completely as the popular song of its period. The last time
I was there, the secret, the master-word, appeared to be Metabolism. I
don’t know what Metabolism is; but I was assured that it explained
everything, would (eventually) solve every problem of health.

Our faith in short-cuts is immense. If you take twelve--or is it
twenty-four?--lessons of a correspondence school, you will double, or
triple, or quadruple your salary automatically; if you read Wells’s
_Outline_ you will immediately know all about history; if you read the
_Book of Etiquette_ you will at once become suave, well-bred, and will
know how to entertain your employer at dinner in a manner certain to be
advantageous to you thereafter; and so on.

The characteristic is primitive and childlike; it amounts to a belief in
miracles, for what is a miracle but a short-cut? And it argues a
conviction that life is a very simple affair, all black and white, with
some one secret that you may at any moment hit upon if you are lucky.
The attitude of mind is that you are very ill or very ignorant or very
poor now, but may in a flash become very well or very wise or very rich;
never that you are not as well as you should be now, but may gradually
become somewhat better, or that you may through assiduous study
moderately improve your education or your financial position.

This black-and-white, miracle-spotted world in which we children of
faith believe, is in reality a poor and barren world, as is revealed by
our novels that exhibit it. I have no interest in the question of
whether our contemporary novelists are better than, for example, the
English, or theirs better than ours; but I do assert that the novel in
England is vastly richer than the novel in America--not glaringly
black-and-white, but full of half-tones, shadows and subtleties. To take
two British novelists of not very strong creative ability, Mr. J. D.
Beresford and Miss Ethel Sidgwick, where among American writers can you
parallel their fine balanced observation, their delicate study of
character? It is not that they are more talented than any one of a
number of our own novelists, only that the world they describe is a
richer world than the world as we see it or have ever seen it. For
years our novels were all sunny, optimistic and sweet; now they are all
drab, cynical and hopeless. Once the village was the abode of quaint,
but pure-souled and kindly people unspoiled by the wicked city; now it
is a horrid hole. Once our young girls were appallingly pure; now they
are appallingly impure. Mr. Wells alone among the English authors of
note lives in, and writes of, such a black-and-white, miraculous world.
He, too, has always some short-cut to offer, that, if adopted, would
transmute life into pure gold; and he, too, has always forgotten his
short-cut of the year-before-last. Which is no doubt the explanation of
the vastly greater esteem he enjoys in America than at home.

I have turned to the novel for an example simply because in it you get,
not by any means a true picture of American life as it is, but a very
perfect picture of the American attitude toward life. But you will see
the same thing, more directly if more fragmentarily, wherever you look.
I.W.W’s are all wicked; La Follette was either a hero or a villain; ‘_If
Winter Comes_ may well last as long as the poem from which it takes its
name’ (William Lyon Phelps).

When the war broke out, European countries, too, suddenly adopted (at
first quite sincerely) this black-and-white world; and America’s heart
went out to Europe--that is, to the shining white part of it. At last
America understood Europe. But as early as 1915 Europeans began to feel
that they had made a bitter mistake, and by now they have slipped back
into an even more perplexed, shadowy and complicated world than before;
and we, who never change, are further away from them than ever.

It is difficult to account for this rigidly consistent attitude of our
mind. Our youth will not explain it (our youth being, as Oscar Wilde
pointed out, our oldest tradition); neither will puritanism, nor the
pioneer spirit, nor even, entirely, our standardization. Perhaps as much
as to any one thing it is due to our unquestioning assumption that the
business of making a living and better is the single, really important
function of a man’s life. (In at least one provincial American city of
considerable size the half-page conceded by the morning paper to art,
letters and music is entitled ‘In Woman’s Realm’). Now it is difficult
enough, heaven knows! to make a living; and, what with the fierceness of
competition, to achieve ‘success in business’ may very likely demand
every ounce of a man’s energy and almost every moment of his day. But it
does not develop more than a very small part of his mind. At the end of
an intensely active life the business man is mentally in much the same
condition as the workman who for thirty years has made the same
automobile part in a factory. Really he is intensely ignorant of life.
By which, of course, I do not mean that he is ignorant because he has
not read Thomas Hardy or heard a Richard Strauss tone-poem; rather, that
he is ignorant of himself. He has not grown up; he is still a child; in
any true sense he does not think at all. And his childish spirit is over
everything; it and his puerile canons are shared even by the thousands
who have not succeeded in business or in so much as making a living. He
is so sure of himself; but he is sure of himself just because he does
not know himself at all. And as he is, so are we.

This widespread ignorance of self is no doubt fostered by the manifold
senseless activities with which our life is encrusted. Telephones, motor
cars, radios, phonographs, movies, magazines, and newspapers save us
from the leisure that we dread because, not being able to think, we
should not know what to do with it. However that may be, ignorance of
self is certainly at the bottom of our conception of the world as
black-and-white and miracle-spotted. One deep unafraid look into our own
hearts, and we should never again see life as so simple, sharp-edged an
affair, because we could never again dissociate ourselves from any
manifestation of it. That, of course, is exactly what we do at present
and have always done, and it leads to many strange and wonderful
things--among others, the institution of scapegoats.

Scapegoats are essential in a black-and-white world--to explain the
black part; and we have had precisely as long a line of them as of
short-cuts to Utopia. At one time, in the golden early days of
muck-raking, they were trusts and their founders; and then we read, with
a shudder of revulsion, of how Mr. Rockefeller’s face resembled that of
an evil bird of prey. For Mr. Henry Ford the Jews are apparently the
scapegoats, while to these the very numerous members of the Ku Klux Klan
generously add the Negroes and the Catholics. But among our intellectual
élite the scapegoats of the moment are undoubtedly Governments and
Diplomats.

Gazing with horror upon the wreck to which the recent war reduced the
world, these more thoughtful members of our public nevertheless share
with the unthinking masses the need of a scapegoat, of something evil
completely outside themselves, on which the blame can be laid. It
approximates the need of a personal Devil. And so they say: ‘France is a
menace to the peace of the world; she wishes to destroy Germany (or to
obtain an hegemony over the coal-and-iron industry of Europe); she is
cold-blooded and selfish. England’s pretence to greater generosity is a
lie; she has annexed two million square miles of German colonies, and
would be lenient toward Germany now in the matter of reparations solely
because she needs a market for her industrial products.’ (Not to mention
what they say of our ex-enemies). By ‘France’ and ‘England’ Americans of
this sort do not mean the French and English peoples; they are not, like
the Ku Klux Klansmen, childish enough to indict whole races. They mean
the governments of England and France; but these they conceive of as
flawless entities with a soul--an evil soul. Now it is undoubtedly true
that any group, whether it be a mob, a literary circle or a government,
does evoke a kind of group-spirit, a sort of soul, which is worse than
the soul of any one of the individuals who constitute the group. But
this is a pallid thing at best, or worst. The group-entity is but a
thought in the minds of the individuals, who alone are real, and very
like ourselves. Once one admits this, the whole black-and-white world
collapses, and one faces a troubled, obscure, but also infinitely richer
and more human world, full of pathetically mixed motives.

Diplomats, the choicest scapegoats to-day, are accused, not without
justice, of playing callously with the lives of millions; using them
like pawns on a chess-board is, I believe, the accepted figure. But what
else, given the power, should we ourselves do, who live equally among
abstractions, and are capable of reading the account of an earthquake in
Colombia and then turning without emotion to the history of the latest
movie scandal in Los Angeles? I do not say that we ought to feel emotion
in learning that thousands have been killed in an earthquake. The lack
of imagination displayed in our failure to do so is doubtless a
necessary protective trait. Without it, to read any newspaper would be
anguish; and we should, like those imaginative persons called cowards,
die many times before our death. The intensest suffering of Jesus, the
Man, must have been not His crucifixion, but His lifelong sympathy for
the suffering of others. It is only this lack of imagination, plus the
tradition in which they are bred, that makes diplomats what they
notoriously are. There has been a good deal of amateur diplomacy of late
years; yet one is not aware of any great improvement on the old, either
in results or in methods.

Here, suddenly, however roundabout the way may have seemed, we find
ourselves back at the subject of self and knowledge of self. We (and by
‘we’ I no longer mean only ‘we Americans,’ whose world, after all, is
but a little more crudely black-and-white than that of other
peoples)--we lack the imagination to project ourselves into others’
lives chiefly because we know so little about ourselves. We may feel
pity, even shed tears, at the sight of a man crushed by a motor car,
because we have all felt physical pain; but we remain cold toward the
feelings of a man caught in embezzlement, because we are unaware of the
latent possibility of embezzlement in ourselves, given sufficiently
impelling circumstances.

Yet even were we gifted with imagination, we could learn directly almost
nothing of other people. There is a wall that shuts us off. We can know
so infinitely little about any of them that it is a wonder we trouble to
divide such strangers into friends and enemies; and, indeed, as one
grows older he finds his enmities dwindling to indifference, and his
friendships fading or congealing into mere habit. In that very imperfect
book, _L’Enfer_, Barbusse’s observer, watching (with a desperate, almost
sick desire to get inside other people’s lives), through the hole in
his chamber wall, what takes place in the room beyond, perceives only
the impenetrable loneliness of the individual--in birth, in death, even
in love.

We are always being told that we should go directly to life for real
knowledge, not get it at second hand from books. And this is no doubt
true enough for certain impressions. What it means to be hungry, for
instance, cannot be learned from the printed page; nor can vivid
impressions of nature be gained in that way. But I suspect that we can
learn more about other men and women from books than from direct
intercourse with them. In a book the writer has, presumably, set out to
say something long meditated, and has deleted all excrescences in the
saying. Such chatter as we indulge in, and listen to, when, instead, we
talk directly with our neighbours!--aimless, pointless, its rare bright
spots extinguished in a sea of words! Read the court stenographer’s
record of any trial, where, at least, the questions and answers are
supposed to be held rigidly to a certain subject, and then consider what
the dictagraph report of any purposeless conversation would be like! But
that is by the way. The important point is that one learns a little
about others from books because from any worthwhile book one learns a
little about oneself. Just as surely as in a novel, an essay, or a poem
the writer reveals himself, so surely do I in reading it reveal myself,
weighing the author’s opinions, likening them to or contrasting them
with my own, and, to the extent of that self-revelation, perceiving his.
Thus, it is better to read difficult books than easy ones, not as
puritanism teaches, because whatever is unpleasant is good for us, but
because the fact that a book is difficult for me means that in my
response to it I am forced down into obscure and unknown regions of
myself. On the other hand, there are for every one, I suppose, certain
books that he is permanently unable to read, certain authors who remain
for him as unknowable as any one met in flesh-and-blood. I, for example,
simply cannot read _Lavengro_ or get to know Borrow. Nowhere in me is
there any response to his thoughts and emotions. It is true that I feel
a vivid distaste for his style, which perhaps ought to be something to
start on; but it does not seem to be enough to melt my icy indifference
to the man and his work. I can learn nothing of myself from _Lavengro_,
and so I can learn nothing of Borrow. It is a pity. My world might be by
just so much the richer, less black-and-white.

Given this profound isolation of the individual, his inability to learn
of others except through learning of himself, it is hard at first to
understand men’s passion for gregariousness. But if you will listen to
almost any conversation you will presently note that each individual in
the loquacious group is but asserting his own opinions, the more
blatantly the less he knows what they really are. In primitive circles
this is done frankly, often with every one talking at once: ‘What _I_
say is----,’ ‘Now _my_ notion is----,’ ‘Well, now, just listen to
me----.’ It is as though all were shouting: ‘How black-and-white the
world is!’ Among more civilized persons there is greater suavity, a
pretence of listening to others’ opinions while awaiting an opportunity
to express one’s own. But it is only a pretence. Still, there is
something in civilization. For in very, very civilized circles
conversation becomes a dainty game. Nothing really felt is ever said,
and ideas are played with as amusing toys; which is both sensible and
delightful.

But if we would really learn about our fellow-men, and exchange our
silly black-and-white world for a subtler, richer, kinder one, we had
best go and live alone on mountain tops. Ten years of such solitude
would give us a deeper, tenderer and more tolerant understanding of
humanity than a lifetime of jostling contacts in the market-place.


THE END


FOOTNOTES:

[1] No longer true, alas, since the complete suppression by the
Fascista government of all freedom of speech and of the press.

[2] I do not happen to have read anything by Valéry Larbaud, but from
what I read about him I conclude that possibly Monsieur Maurois may
find a little relief from loneliness in his company.





Title: Anna Karenina

Author: Leo Tolstoy

Release Date: July 1, 1998 [eBook #1399]
[Most recently updated: September 20, 2022]

Language: English


Produced by: David Brannan, Andrew Sly and David Widger

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANNA KARENINA ***

[Illustration]




 ANNA KARENINA 

 by Leo Tolstoy 

 Translated by Constance Garnett 

Contents


 PART ONE
 PART TWO
 PART THREE
 PART FOUR
 PART FIVE
 PART SIX
 PART SEVEN
 PART EIGHT




PART ONE

Chapter 1


Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its
own way.

Everything was in confusion in the Oblonskys’ house. The wife had
discovered that the husband was carrying on an intrigue with a French
girl, who had been a governess in their family, and she had announced
to her husband that she could not go on living in the same house with
him. This position of affairs had now lasted three days, and not only
the husband and wife themselves, but all the members of their family
and household, were painfully conscious of it. Every person in the
house felt that there was no sense in their living together, and that
the stray people brought together by chance in any inn had more in
common with one another than they, the members of the family and
household of the Oblonskys. The wife did not leave her own room, the
husband had not been at home for three days. The children ran wild all
over the house; the English governess quarreled with the housekeeper,
and wrote to a friend asking her to look out for a new situation for
her; the man-cook had walked off the day before just at dinner time;
the kitchen-maid, and the coachman had given warning.

Three days after the quarrel, Prince Stepan Arkadyevitch
Oblonsky—Stiva, as he was called in the fashionable world—woke up at
his usual hour, that is, at eight o’clock in the morning, not in his
wife’s bedroom, but on the leather-covered sofa in his study. He turned
over his stout, well-cared-for person on the springy sofa, as though he
would sink into a long sleep again; he vigorously embraced the pillow
on the other side and buried his face in it; but all at once he jumped
up, sat up on the sofa, and opened his eyes.

“Yes, yes, how was it now?” he thought, going over his dream. “Now, how
was it? To be sure! Alabin was giving a dinner at Darmstadt; no, not
Darmstadt, but something American. Yes, but then, Darmstadt was in
America. Yes, Alabin was giving a dinner on glass tables, and the
tables sang, _Il mio tesoro_—not _Il mio tesoro_ though, but something
better, and there were some sort of little decanters on the table, and
they were women, too,” he remembered.

Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes twinkled gaily, and he pondered with a
smile. “Yes, it was nice, very nice. There was a great deal more that
was delightful, only there’s no putting it into words, or even
expressing it in one’s thoughts awake.” And noticing a gleam of light
peeping in beside one of the serge curtains, he cheerfully dropped his
feet over the edge of the sofa, and felt about with them for his
slippers, a present on his last birthday, worked for him by his wife on
gold-colored morocco. And, as he had done every day for the last nine
years, he stretched out his hand, without getting up, towards the place
where his dressing-gown always hung in his bedroom. And thereupon he
suddenly remembered that he was not sleeping in his wife’s room, but in
his study, and why: the smile vanished from his face, he knitted his
brows.

“Ah, ah, ah! Oo!...” he muttered, recalling everything that had
happened. And again every detail of his quarrel with his wife was
present to his imagination, all the hopelessness of his position, and
worst of all, his own fault.

“Yes, she won’t forgive me, and she can’t forgive me. And the most
awful thing about it is that it’s all my fault—all my fault, though I’m
not to blame. That’s the point of the whole situation,” he reflected.
“Oh, oh, oh!” he kept repeating in despair, as he remembered the
acutely painful sensations caused him by this quarrel.

Most unpleasant of all was the first minute when, on coming, happy and
good-humored, from the theater, with a huge pear in his hand for his
wife, he had not found his wife in the drawing-room, to his surprise
had not found her in the study either, and saw her at last in her
bedroom with the unlucky letter that revealed everything in her hand.

She, his Dolly, forever fussing and worrying over household details,
and limited in her ideas, as he considered, was sitting perfectly still
with the letter in her hand, looking at him with an expression of
horror, despair, and indignation.

“What’s this? this?” she asked, pointing to the letter.

And at this recollection, Stepan Arkadyevitch, as is so often the case,
was not so much annoyed at the fact itself as at the way in which he
had met his wife’s words.

There happened to him at that instant what does happen to people when
they are unexpectedly caught in something very disgraceful. He did not
succeed in adapting his face to the position in which he was placed
towards his wife by the discovery of his fault. Instead of being hurt,
denying, defending himself, begging forgiveness, instead of remaining
indifferent even—anything would have been better than what he did
do—his face utterly involuntarily (reflex spinal action, reflected
Stepan Arkadyevitch, who was fond of physiology)—utterly involuntarily
assumed its habitual, good-humored, and therefore idiotic smile.

This idiotic smile he could not forgive himself. Catching sight of that
smile, Dolly shuddered as though at physical pain, broke out with her
characteristic heat into a flood of cruel words, and rushed out of the
room. Since then she had refused to see her husband.

“It’s that idiotic smile that’s to blame for it all,” thought Stepan
Arkadyevitch.

“But what’s to be done? What’s to be done?” he said to himself in
despair, and found no answer.


Chapter 2

Stepan Arkadyevitch was a truthful man in his relations with himself.
He was incapable of deceiving himself and persuading himself that he
repented of his conduct. He could not at this date repent of the fact
that he, a handsome, susceptible man of thirty-four, was not in love
with his wife, the mother of five living and two dead children, and
only a year younger than himself. All he repented of was that he had
not succeeded better in hiding it from his wife. But he felt all the
difficulty of his position and was sorry for his wife, his children,
and himself. Possibly he might have managed to conceal his sins better
from his wife if he had anticipated that the knowledge of them would
have had such an effect on her. He had never clearly thought out the
subject, but he had vaguely conceived that his wife must long ago have
suspected him of being unfaithful to her, and shut her eyes to the
fact. He had even supposed that she, a worn-out woman no longer young
or good-looking, and in no way remarkable or interesting, merely a good
mother, ought from a sense of fairness to take an indulgent view. It
had turned out quite the other way.

“Oh, it’s awful! oh dear, oh dear! awful!” Stepan Arkadyevitch kept
repeating to himself, and he could think of nothing to be done. “And
how well things were going up till now! how well we got on! She was
contented and happy in her children; I never interfered with her in
anything; I let her manage the children and the house just as she
liked. It’s true it’s bad _her_ having been a governess in our house.
That’s bad! There’s something common, vulgar, in flirting with one’s
governess. But what a governess!” (He vividly recalled the roguish
black eyes of Mlle. Roland and her smile.) “But after all, while she
was in the house, I kept myself in hand. And the worst of it all is
that she’s already ... it seems as if ill-luck would have it so! Oh,
oh! But what, what is to be done?”

There was no solution, but that universal solution which life gives to
all questions, even the most complex and insoluble. That answer is: one
must live in the needs of the day—that is, forget oneself. To forget
himself in sleep was impossible now, at least till nighttime; he could
not go back now to the music sung by the decanter-women; so he must
forget himself in the dream of daily life.

“Then we shall see,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said to himself, and getting
up he put on a gray dressing-gown lined with blue silk, tied the
tassels in a knot, and, drawing a deep breath of air into his broad,
bare chest, he walked to the window with his usual confident step,
turning out his feet that carried his full frame so easily. He pulled
up the blind and rang the bell loudly. It was at once answered by the
appearance of an old friend, his valet, Matvey, carrying his clothes,
his boots, and a telegram. Matvey was followed by the barber with all
the necessaries for shaving.

“Are there any papers from the office?” asked Stepan Arkadyevitch,
taking the telegram and seating himself at the looking-glass.

“On the table,” replied Matvey, glancing with inquiring sympathy at his
master; and, after a short pause, he added with a sly smile, “They’ve
sent from the carriage-jobbers.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch made no reply, he merely glanced at Matvey in the
looking-glass. In the glance, in which their eyes met in the
looking-glass, it was clear that they understood one another. Stepan
Arkadyevitch’s eyes asked: “Why do you tell me that? don’t you know?”

Matvey put his hands in his jacket pockets, thrust out one leg, and
gazed silently, good-humoredly, with a faint smile, at his master.

“I told them to come on Sunday, and till then not to trouble you or
themselves for nothing,” he said. He had obviously prepared the
sentence beforehand.

Stepan Arkadyevitch saw Matvey wanted to make a joke and attract
attention to himself. Tearing open the telegram, he read it through,
guessing at the words, misspelt as they always are in telegrams, and
his face brightened.

“Matvey, my sister Anna Arkadyevna will be here tomorrow,” he said,
checking for a minute the sleek, plump hand of the barber, cutting a
pink path through his long, curly whiskers.

“Thank God!” said Matvey, showing by this response that he, like his
master, realized the significance of this arrival—that is, that Anna
Arkadyevna, the sister he was so fond of, might bring about a
reconciliation between husband and wife.

“Alone, or with her husband?” inquired Matvey.

Stepan Arkadyevitch could not answer, as the barber was at work on his
upper lip, and he raised one finger. Matvey nodded at the
looking-glass.

“Alone. Is the room to be got ready upstairs?”

“Inform Darya Alexandrovna: where she orders.”

“Darya Alexandrovna?” Matvey repeated, as though in doubt.

“Yes, inform her. Here, take the telegram; give it to her, and then do
what she tells you.”

“You want to try it on,” Matvey understood, but he only said, “Yes,
sir.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch was already washed and combed and ready to be
dressed, when Matvey, stepping deliberately in his creaky boots, came
back into the room with the telegram in his hand. The barber had gone.

“Darya Alexandrovna told me to inform you that she is going away. Let
him do—that is you—as he likes,” he said, laughing only with his eyes,
and putting his hands in his pockets, he watched his master with his
head on one side. Stepan Arkadyevitch was silent a minute. Then a
good-humored and rather pitiful smile showed itself on his handsome
face.

“Eh, Matvey?” he said, shaking his head.

“It’s all right, sir; she will come round,” said Matvey.

“Come round?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Do you think so? Who’s there?” asked Stepan Arkadyevitch, hearing the
rustle of a woman’s dress at the door.

“It’s I,” said a firm, pleasant, woman’s voice, and the stern,
pockmarked face of Matrona Philimonovna, the nurse, was thrust in at
the doorway.

“Well, what is it, Matrona?” queried Stepan Arkadyevitch, going up to
her at the door.

Although Stepan Arkadyevitch was completely in the wrong as regards his
wife, and was conscious of this himself, almost everyone in the house
(even the nurse, Darya Alexandrovna’s chief ally) was on his side.

“Well, what now?” he asked disconsolately.

“Go to her, sir; own your fault again. Maybe God will aid you. She is
suffering so, it’s sad to see her; and besides, everything in the house
is topsy-turvy. You must have pity, sir, on the children. Beg her
forgiveness, sir. There’s no help for it! One must take the
consequences....”

“But she won’t see me.”

“You do your part. God is merciful; pray to God, sir, pray to God.”

“Come, that’ll do, you can go,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, blushing
suddenly. “Well now, do dress me.” He turned to Matvey and threw off
his dressing-gown decisively.

Matvey was already holding up the shirt like a horse’s collar, and,
blowing off some invisible speck, he slipped it with obvious pleasure
over the well-groomed body of his master.


Chapter 3

When he was dressed, Stepan Arkadyevitch sprinkled some scent on
himself, pulled down his shirt-cuffs, distributed into his pockets his
cigarettes, pocketbook, matches, and watch with its double chain and
seals, and shaking out his handkerchief, feeling himself clean,
fragrant, healthy, and physically at ease, in spite of his unhappiness,
he walked with a slight swing on each leg into the dining-room, where
coffee was already waiting for him, and beside the coffee, letters and
papers from the office.

He read the letters. One was very unpleasant, from a merchant who was
buying a forest on his wife’s property. To sell this forest was
absolutely essential; but at present, until he was reconciled with his
wife, the subject could not be discussed. The most unpleasant thing of
all was that his pecuniary interests should in this way enter into the
question of his reconciliation with his wife. And the idea that he
might be led on by his interests, that he might seek a reconciliation
with his wife on account of the sale of the forest—that idea hurt him.

When he had finished his letters, Stepan Arkadyevitch moved the
office-papers close to him, rapidly looked through two pieces of
business, made a few notes with a big pencil, and pushing away the
papers, turned to his coffee. As he sipped his coffee, he opened a
still damp morning paper, and began reading it.

Stepan Arkadyevitch took in and read a liberal paper, not an extreme
one, but one advocating the views held by the majority. And in spite of
the fact that science, art, and politics had no special interest for
him, he firmly held those views on all these subjects which were held
by the majority and by his paper, and he only changed them when the
majority changed them—or, more strictly speaking, he did not change
them, but they imperceptibly changed of themselves within him.

Stepan Arkadyevitch had not chosen his political opinions or his views;
these political opinions and views had come to him of themselves, just
as he did not choose the shapes of his hat and coat, but simply took
those that were being worn. And for him, living in a certain
society—owing to the need, ordinarily developed at years of discretion,
for some degree of mental activity—to have views was just as
indispensable as to have a hat. If there was a reason for his
preferring liberal to conservative views, which were held also by many
of his circle, it arose not from his considering liberalism more
rational, but from its being in closer accordance with his manner of
life. The liberal party said that in Russia everything is wrong, and
certainly Stepan Arkadyevitch had many debts and was decidedly short of
money. The liberal party said that marriage is an institution quite out
of date, and that it needs reconstruction; and family life certainly
afforded Stepan Arkadyevitch little gratification, and forced him into
lying and hypocrisy, which was so repulsive to his nature. The liberal
party said, or rather allowed it to be understood, that religion is
only a curb to keep in check the barbarous classes of the people; and
Stepan Arkadyevitch could not get through even a short service without
his legs aching from standing up, and could never make out what was the
object of all the terrible and high-flown language about another world
when life might be so very amusing in this world. And with all this,
Stepan Arkadyevitch, who liked a joke, was fond of puzzling a plain man
by saying that if he prided himself on his origin, he ought not to stop
at Rurik and disown the first founder of his family—the monkey. And so
Liberalism had become a habit of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s, and he liked
his newspaper, as he did his cigar after dinner, for the slight fog it
diffused in his brain. He read the leading article, in which it was
maintained that it was quite senseless in our day to raise an outcry
that radicalism was threatening to swallow up all conservative
elements, and that the government ought to take measures to crush the
revolutionary hydra; that, on the contrary, “in our opinion the danger
lies not in that fantastic revolutionary hydra, but in the obstinacy of
traditionalism clogging progress,” etc., etc. He read another article,
too, a financial one, which alluded to Bentham and Mill, and dropped
some innuendoes reflecting on the ministry. With his characteristic
quickwittedness he caught the drift of each innuendo, divined whence it
came, at whom and on what ground it was aimed, and that afforded him,
as it always did, a certain satisfaction. But today that satisfaction
was embittered by Matrona Philimonovna’s advice and the unsatisfactory
state of the household. He read, too, that Count Beist was rumored to
have left for Wiesbaden, and that one need have no more gray hair, and
of the sale of a light carriage, and of a young person seeking a
situation; but these items of information did not give him, as usual, a
quiet, ironical gratification. Having finished the paper, a second cup
of coffee and a roll and butter, he got up, shaking the crumbs of the
roll off his waistcoat; and, squaring his broad chest, he smiled
joyously: not because there was anything particularly agreeable in his
mind—the joyous smile was evoked by a good digestion.

But this joyous smile at once recalled everything to him, and he grew
thoughtful.

Two childish voices (Stepan Arkadyevitch recognized the voices of
Grisha, his youngest boy, and Tanya, his eldest girl) were heard
outside the door. They were carrying something, and dropped it.

“I told you not to sit passengers on the roof,” said the little girl in
English; “there, pick them up!”

“Everything’s in confusion,” thought Stepan Arkadyevitch; “there are
the children running about by themselves.” And going to the door, he
called them. They threw down the box, that represented a train, and
came in to their father.

The little girl, her father’s favorite, ran up boldly, embraced him,
and hung laughingly on his neck, enjoying as she always did the smell
of scent that came from his whiskers. At last the little girl kissed
his face, which was flushed from his stooping posture and beaming with
tenderness, loosed her hands, and was about to run away again; but her
father held her back.

“How is mamma?” he asked, passing his hand over his daughter’s smooth,
soft little neck. “Good morning,” he said, smiling to the boy, who had
come up to greet him. He was conscious that he loved the boy less, and
always tried to be fair; but the boy felt it, and did not respond with
a smile to his father’s chilly smile.

“Mamma? She is up,” answered the girl.

Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed. “That means that she’s not slept again all
night,” he thought.

“Well, is she cheerful?”

The little girl knew that there was a quarrel between her father and
mother, and that her mother could not be cheerful, and that her father
must be aware of this, and that he was pretending when he asked about
it so lightly. And she blushed for her father. He at once perceived it,
and blushed too.

“I don’t know,” she said. “She did not say we must do our lessons, but
she said we were to go for a walk with Miss Hoole to grandmamma’s.”

“Well, go, Tanya, my darling. Oh, wait a minute, though,” he said,
still holding her and stroking her soft little hand.

He took off the mantelpiece, where he had put it yesterday, a little
box of sweets, and gave her two, picking out her favorites, a chocolate
and a fondant.

“For Grisha?” said the little girl, pointing to the chocolate.

“Yes, yes.” And still stroking her little shoulder, he kissed her on
the roots of her hair and neck, and let her go.

“The carriage is ready,” said Matvey; “but there’s someone to see you
with a petition.”

“Been here long?” asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“Half an hour.”

“How many times have I told you to tell me at once?”

“One must let you drink your coffee in peace, at least,” said Matvey,
in the affectionately gruff tone with which it was impossible to be
angry.

“Well, show the person up at once,” said Oblonsky, frowning with
vexation.

The petitioner, the widow of a staff captain Kalinin, came with a
request impossible and unreasonable; but Stepan Arkadyevitch, as he
generally did, made her sit down, heard her to the end attentively
without interrupting her, and gave her detailed advice as to how and to
whom to apply, and even wrote her, in his large, sprawling, good and
legible hand, a confident and fluent little note to a personage who
might be of use to her. Having got rid of the staff captain’s widow,
Stepan Arkadyevitch took his hat and stopped to recollect whether he
had forgotten anything. It appeared that he had forgotten nothing
except what he wanted to forget—his wife.

“Ah, yes!” He bowed his head, and his handsome face assumed a harassed
expression. “To go, or not to go!” he said to himself; and an inner
voice told him he must not go, that nothing could come of it but
falsity; that to amend, to set right their relations was impossible,
because it was impossible to make her attractive again and able to
inspire love, or to make him an old man, not susceptible to love.
Except deceit and lying nothing could come of it now; and deceit and
lying were opposed to his nature.

“It must be some time, though: it can’t go on like this,” he said,
trying to give himself courage. He squared his chest, took out a
cigarette, took two whiffs at it, flung it into a mother-of-pearl
ashtray, and with rapid steps walked through the drawing-room, and
opened the other door into his wife’s bedroom.


Chapter 4

Darya Alexandrovna, in a dressing jacket, and with her now scanty, once
luxuriant and beautiful hair fastened up with hairpins on the nape of
her neck, with a sunken, thin face and large, startled eyes, which
looked prominent from the thinness of her face, was standing among a
litter of all sorts of things scattered all over the room, before an
open bureau, from which she was taking something. Hearing her husband’s
steps, she stopped, looking towards the door, and trying assiduously to
give her features a severe and contemptuous expression. She felt she
was afraid of him, and afraid of the coming interview. She was just
attempting to do what she had attempted to do ten times already in
these last three days—to sort out the children’s things and her own, so
as to take them to her mother’s—and again she could not bring herself
to do this; but now again, as each time before, she kept saying to
herself, “that things cannot go on like this, that she must take some
step” to punish him, put him to shame, avenge on him some little part
at least of the suffering he had caused her. She still continued to
tell herself that she should leave him, but she was conscious that this
was impossible; it was impossible because she could not get out of the
habit of regarding him as her husband and loving him. Besides this, she
realized that if even here in her own house she could hardly manage to
look after her five children properly, they would be still worse off
where she was going with them all. As it was, even in the course of
these three days, the youngest was unwell from being given unwholesome
soup, and the others had almost gone without their dinner the day
before. She was conscious that it was impossible to go away; but,
cheating herself, she went on all the same sorting out her things and
pretending she was going.

Seeing her husband, she dropped her hands into the drawer of the bureau
as though looking for something, and only looked round at him when he
had come quite up to her. But her face, to which she tried to give a
severe and resolute expression, betrayed bewilderment and suffering.

“Dolly!” he said in a subdued and timid voice. He bent his head towards
his shoulder and tried to look pitiful and humble, but for all that he
was radiant with freshness and health. In a rapid glance she scanned
his figure that beamed with health and freshness. “Yes, he is happy and
content!” she thought; “while I.... And that disgusting good nature,
which everyone likes him for and praises—I hate that good nature of
his,” she thought. Her mouth stiffened, the muscles of the cheek
contracted on the right side of her pale, nervous face.

“What do you want?” she said in a rapid, deep, unnatural voice.

“Dolly!” he repeated, with a quiver in his voice. “Anna is coming
today.”

“Well, what is that to me? I can’t see her!” she cried.

“But you must, really, Dolly....”

“Go away, go away, go away!” she shrieked, not looking at him, as
though this shriek were called up by physical pain.

Stepan Arkadyevitch could be calm when he thought of his wife, he could
hope that she would _come round_, as Matvey expressed it, and could
quietly go on reading his paper and drinking his coffee; but when he
saw her tortured, suffering face, heard the tone of her voice,
submissive to fate and full of despair, there was a catch in his breath
and a lump in his throat, and his eyes began to shine with tears.

“My God! what have I done? Dolly! For God’s sake!... You know....” He
could not go on; there was a sob in his throat.

She shut the bureau with a slam, and glanced at him.

“Dolly, what can I say?... One thing: forgive.... Remember, cannot nine
years of my life atone for an instant....”

She dropped her eyes and listened, expecting what he would say, as it
were beseeching him in some way or other to make her believe
differently.

“—instant of passion?” he said, and would have gone on, but at that
word, as at a pang of physical pain, her lips stiffened again, and
again the muscles of her right cheek worked.

“Go away, go out of the room!” she shrieked still more shrilly, “and
don’t talk to me of your passion and your loathsomeness.”

She tried to go out, but tottered, and clung to the back of a chair to
support herself. His face relaxed, his lips swelled, his eyes were
swimming with tears.

“Dolly!” he said, sobbing now; “for mercy’s sake, think of the
children; they are not to blame! I am to blame, and punish me, make me
expiate my fault. Anything I can do, I am ready to do anything! I am to
blame, no words can express how much I am to blame! But, Dolly, forgive
me!”

She sat down. He listened to her hard, heavy breathing, and he was
unutterably sorry for her. She tried several times to begin to speak,
but could not. He waited.

“You remember the children, Stiva, to play with them; but I remember
them, and know that this means their ruin,” she said—obviously one of
the phrases she had more than once repeated to herself in the course of
the last few days.

She had called him “Stiva,” and he glanced at her with gratitude, and
moved to take her hand, but she drew back from him with aversion.

“I think of the children, and for that reason I would do anything in
the world to save them, but I don’t myself know how to save them. By
taking them away from their father, or by leaving them with a vicious
father—yes, a vicious father.... Tell me, after what ... has happened,
can we live together? Is that possible? Tell me, eh, is it possible?”
she repeated, raising her voice, “after my husband, the father of my
children, enters into a love affair with his own children’s governess?”

“But what could I do? what could I do?” he kept saying in a pitiful
voice, not knowing what he was saying, as his head sank lower and
lower.

“You are loathsome to me, repulsive!” she shrieked, getting more and
more heated. “Your tears mean nothing! You have never loved me; you
have neither heart nor honorable feeling! You are hateful to me,
disgusting, a stranger—yes, a complete stranger!” With pain and wrath
she uttered the word so terrible to herself—_stranger_.

He looked at her, and the fury expressed in her face alarmed and amazed
him. He did not understand how his pity for her exasperated her. She
saw in him sympathy for her, but not love. “No, she hates me. She will
not forgive me,” he thought.

“It is awful! awful!” he said.

At that moment in the next room a child began to cry; probably it had
fallen down. Darya Alexandrovna listened, and her face suddenly
softened.

She seemed to be pulling herself together for a few seconds, as though
she did not know where she was, and what she was doing, and getting up
rapidly, she moved towards the door.

“Well, she loves my child,” he thought, noticing the change of her face
at the child’s cry, “my child: how can she hate me?”

“Dolly, one word more,” he said, following her.

“If you come near me, I will call in the servants, the children! They
may all know you are a scoundrel! I am going away at once, and you may
live here with your mistress!”

And she went out, slamming the door.

Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed, wiped his face, and with a subdued tread
walked out of the room. “Matvey says she will come round; but how? I
don’t see the least chance of it. Ah, oh, how horrible it is! And how
vulgarly she shouted,” he said to himself, remembering her shriek and
the words—“scoundrel” and “mistress.” “And very likely the maids were
listening! Horribly vulgar! horrible!” Stepan Arkadyevitch stood a few
seconds alone, wiped his face, squared his chest, and walked out of the
room.

It was Friday, and in the dining-room the German watchmaker was winding
up the clock. Stepan Arkadyevitch remembered his joke about this
punctual, bald watchmaker, “that the German was wound up for a whole
lifetime himself, to wind up watches,” and he smiled. Stepan
Arkadyevitch was fond of a joke: “And maybe she will come round! That’s
a good expression, ‘_come round,_’” he thought. “I must repeat that.”

“Matvey!” he shouted. “Arrange everything with Darya in the sitting
room for Anna Arkadyevna,” he said to Matvey when he came in.

“Yes, sir.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch put on his fur coat and went out onto the steps.

“You won’t dine at home?” said Matvey, seeing him off.

“That’s as it happens. But here’s for the housekeeping,” he said,
taking ten roubles from his pocketbook. “That’ll be enough.”

“Enough or not enough, we must make it do,” said Matvey, slamming the
carriage door and stepping back onto the steps.

Darya Alexandrovna meanwhile having pacified the child, and knowing
from the sound of the carriage that he had gone off, went back again to
her bedroom. It was her solitary refuge from the household cares which
crowded upon her directly she went out from it. Even now, in the short
time she had been in the nursery, the English governess and Matrona
Philimonovna had succeeded in putting several questions to her, which
did not admit of delay, and which only she could answer: “What were the
children to put on for their walk? Should they have any milk? Should
not a new cook be sent for?”

“Ah, let me alone, let me alone!” she said, and going back to her
bedroom she sat down in the same place as she had sat when talking to
her husband, clasping tightly her thin hands with the rings that
slipped down on her bony fingers, and fell to going over in her memory
all the conversation. “He has gone! But has he broken it off with her?”
she thought. “Can it be he sees her? Why didn’t I ask him! No, no,
reconciliation is impossible. Even if we remain in the same house, we
are strangers—strangers forever!” She repeated again with special
significance the word so dreadful to her. “And how I loved him! my God,
how I loved him!... How I loved him! And now don’t I love him? Don’t I
love him more than before? The most horrible thing is,” she began, but
did not finish her thought, because Matrona Philimonovna put her head
in at the door.

“Let us send for my brother,” she said; “he can get a dinner anyway, or
we shall have the children getting nothing to eat till six again, like
yesterday.”

“Very well, I will come directly and see about it. But did you send for
some new milk?”

And Darya Alexandrovna plunged into the duties of the day, and drowned
her grief in them for a time.


Chapter 5

Stepan Arkadyevitch had learned easily at school, thanks to his
excellent abilities, but he had been idle and mischievous, and
therefore was one of the lowest in his class. But in spite of his
habitually dissipated mode of life, his inferior grade in the service,
and his comparative youth, he occupied the honorable and lucrative
position of president of one of the government boards at Moscow. This
post he had received through his sister Anna’s husband, Alexey
Alexandrovitch Karenin, who held one of the most important positions in
the ministry to whose department the Moscow office belonged. But if
Karenin had not got his brother-in-law this berth, then through a
hundred other personages—brothers, sisters, cousins, uncles, and
aunts—Stiva Oblonsky would have received this post, or some other
similar one, together with the salary of six thousand absolutely
needful for him, as his affairs, in spite of his wife’s considerable
property, were in an embarrassed condition.

Half Moscow and Petersburg were friends and relations of Stepan
Arkadyevitch. He was born in the midst of those who had been and are
the powerful ones of this world. One-third of the men in the
government, the older men, had been friends of his father’s, and had
known him in petticoats; another third were his intimate chums, and the
remainder were friendly acquaintances. Consequently the distributors of
earthly blessings in the shape of places, rents, shares, and such, were
all his friends, and could not overlook one of their own set; and
Oblonsky had no need to make any special exertion to get a lucrative
post. He had only not to refuse things, not to show jealousy, not to be
quarrelsome or take offense, all of which from his characteristic good
nature he never did. It would have struck him as absurd if he had been
told that he would not get a position with the salary he required,
especially as he expected nothing out of the way; he only wanted what
the men of his own age and standing did get, and he was no worse
qualified for performing duties of the kind than any other man.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was not merely liked by all who knew him for his
good humor, but for his bright disposition, and his unquestionable
honesty. In him, in his handsome, radiant figure, his sparkling eyes,
black hair and eyebrows, and the white and red of his face, there was
something which produced a physical effect of kindliness and good humor
on the people who met him. “Aha! Stiva! Oblonsky! Here he is!” was
almost always said with a smile of delight on meeting him. Even though
it happened at times that after a conversation with him it seemed that
nothing particularly delightful had happened, the next day, and the
next, everyone was just as delighted at meeting him again.

After filling for three years the post of president of one of the
government boards at Moscow, Stepan Arkadyevitch had won the respect,
as well as the liking, of his fellow-officials, subordinates, and
superiors, and all who had had business with him. The principal
qualities in Stepan Arkadyevitch which had gained him this universal
respect in the service consisted, in the first place, of his extreme
indulgence for others, founded on a consciousness of his own
shortcomings; secondly, of his perfect liberalism—not the liberalism he
read of in the papers, but the liberalism that was in his blood, in
virtue of which he treated all men perfectly equally and exactly the
same, whatever their fortune or calling might be; and thirdly—the most
important point—his complete indifference to the business in which he
was engaged, in consequence of which he was never carried away, and
never made mistakes.

On reaching the offices of the board, Stepan Arkadyevitch, escorted by
a deferential porter with a portfolio, went into his little private
room, put on his uniform, and went into the boardroom. The clerks and
copyists all rose, greeting him with good-humored deference. Stepan
Arkadyevitch moved quickly, as ever, to his place, shook hands with his
colleagues, and sat down. He made a joke or two, and talked just as
much as was consistent with due decorum, and began work. No one knew
better than Stepan Arkadyevitch how to hit on the exact line between
freedom, simplicity, and official stiffness necessary for the agreeable
conduct of business. A secretary, with the good-humored deference
common to everyone in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s office, came up with
papers, and began to speak in the familiar and easy tone which had been
introduced by Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“We have succeeded in getting the information from the government
department of Penza. Here, would you care?...”

“You’ve got them at last?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laying his finger
on the paper. “Now, gentlemen....”

And the sitting of the board began.

“If they knew,” he thought, bending his head with a significant air as
he listened to the report, “what a guilty little boy their president
was half an hour ago.” And his eyes were laughing during the reading of
the report. Till two o’clock the sitting would go on without a break,
and at two o’clock there would be an interval and luncheon.

It was not yet two, when the large glass doors of the boardroom
suddenly opened and someone came in.

All the officials sitting on the further side under the portrait of the
Tsar and the eagle, delighted at any distraction, looked round at the
door; but the doorkeeper standing at the door at once drove out the
intruder, and closed the glass door after him.

When the case had been read through, Stepan Arkadyevitch got up and
stretched, and by way of tribute to the liberalism of the times took
out a cigarette in the boardroom and went into his private room. Two of
the members of the board, the old veteran in the service, Nikitin, and
the _Kammerjunker_ Grinevitch, went in with him.

“We shall have time to finish after lunch,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“To be sure we shall!” said Nikitin.

“A pretty sharp fellow this Fomin must be,” said Grinevitch of one of
the persons taking part in the case they were examining.

Stepan Arkadyevitch frowned at Grinevitch’s words, giving him thereby
to understand that it was improper to pass judgment prematurely, and
made him no reply.

“Who was that came in?” he asked the doorkeeper.

“Someone, your excellency, crept in without permission directly my back
was turned. He was asking for you. I told him: when the members come
out, then....”

“Where is he?”

“Maybe he’s gone into the passage, but here he comes anyway. That is
he,” said the doorkeeper, pointing to a strongly built,
broad-shouldered man with a curly beard, who, without taking off his
sheepskin cap, was running lightly and rapidly up the worn steps of the
stone staircase. One of the members going down—a lean official with a
portfolio—stood out of his way and looked disapprovingly at the legs of
the stranger, then glanced inquiringly at Oblonsky.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was standing at the top of the stairs. His
good-naturedly beaming face above the embroidered collar of his uniform
beamed more than ever when he recognized the man coming up.

“Why, it’s actually you, Levin, at last!” he said with a friendly
mocking smile, scanning Levin as he approached. “How is it you have
deigned to look me up in this den?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and not
content with shaking hands, he kissed his friend. “Have you been here
long?”

“I have just come, and very much wanted to see you,” said Levin,
looking shyly and at the same time angrily and uneasily around.

“Well, let’s go into my room,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who knew his
friend’s sensitive and irritable shyness, and, taking his arm, he drew
him along, as though guiding him through dangers.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was on familiar terms with almost all his
acquaintances, and called almost all of them by their Christian names:
old men of sixty, boys of twenty, actors, ministers, merchants, and
adjutant-generals, so that many of his intimate chums were to be found
at the extreme ends of the social ladder, and would have been very much
surprised to learn that they had, through the medium of Oblonsky,
something in common. He was the familiar friend of everyone with whom
he took a glass of champagne, and he took a glass of champagne with
everyone, and when in consequence he met any of his disreputable chums,
as he used in joke to call many of his friends, in the presence of his
subordinates, he well knew how, with his characteristic tact, to
diminish the disagreeable impression made on them. Levin was not a
disreputable chum, but Oblonsky, with his ready tact, felt that Levin
fancied he might not care to show his intimacy with him before his
subordinates, and so he made haste to take him off into his room.

Levin was almost of the same age as Oblonsky; their intimacy did not
rest merely on champagne. Levin had been the friend and companion of
his early youth. They were fond of one another in spite of the
difference of their characters and tastes, as friends are fond of one
another who have been together in early youth. But in spite of this,
each of them—as is often the way with men who have selected careers of
different kinds—though in discussion he would even justify the other’s
career, in his heart despised it. It seemed to each of them that the
life he led himself was the only real life, and the life led by his
friend was a mere phantasm. Oblonsky could not restrain a slight
mocking smile at the sight of Levin. How often he had seen him come up
to Moscow from the country where he was doing something, but what
precisely Stepan Arkadyevitch could never quite make out, and indeed he
took no interest in the matter. Levin arrived in Moscow always excited
and in a hurry, rather ill at ease and irritated by his own want of
ease, and for the most part with a perfectly new, unexpected view of
things. Stepan Arkadyevitch laughed at this, and liked it. In the same
way Levin in his heart despised the town mode of life of his friend,
and his official duties, which he laughed at, and regarded as trifling.
But the difference was that Oblonsky, as he was doing the same as
everyone did, laughed complacently and good-humoredly, while Levin
laughed without complacency and sometimes angrily.

“We have long been expecting you,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, going into
his room and letting Levin’s hand go as though to show that here all
danger was over. “I am very, very glad to see you,” he went on. “Well,
how are you? Eh? When did you come?”

Levin was silent, looking at the unknown faces of Oblonsky’s two
companions, and especially at the hand of the elegant Grinevitch, which
had such long white fingers, such long yellow filbert-shaped nails, and
such huge shining studs on the shirt-cuff, that apparently they
absorbed all his attention, and allowed him no freedom of thought.
Oblonsky noticed this at once, and smiled.

“Ah, to be sure, let me introduce you,” he said. “My colleagues: Philip
Ivanitch Nikitin, Mihail Stanislavitch Grinevitch”—and turning to
Levin—“a district councilor, a modern district councilman, a gymnast
who lifts thirteen stone with one hand, a cattle-breeder and sportsman,
and my friend, Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin, the brother of Sergey
Ivanovitch Koznishev.”

“Delighted,” said the veteran.

“I have the honor of knowing your brother, Sergey Ivanovitch,” said
Grinevitch, holding out his slender hand with its long nails.

Levin frowned, shook hands coldly, and at once turned to Oblonsky.
Though he had a great respect for his half-brother, an author well
known to all Russia, he could not endure it when people treated him not
as Konstantin Levin, but as the brother of the celebrated Koznishev.

“No, I am no longer a district councilor. I have quarreled with them
all, and don’t go to the meetings any more,” he said, turning to
Oblonsky.

“You’ve been quick about it!” said Oblonsky with a smile. “But how?
why?”

“It’s a long story. I will tell you some time,” said Levin, but he
began telling him at once. “Well, to put it shortly, I was convinced
that nothing was really done by the district councils, or ever could
be,” he began, as though someone had just insulted him. “On one side
it’s a plaything; they play at being a parliament, and I’m neither
young enough nor old enough to find amusement in playthings; and on the
other side” (he stammered) “it’s a means for the coterie of the
district to make money. Formerly they had wardships, courts of justice,
now they have the district council—not in the form of bribes, but in
the form of unearned salary,” he said, as hotly as though someone of
those present had opposed his opinion.

“Aha! You’re in a new phase again, I see—a conservative,” said Stepan
Arkadyevitch. “However, we can go into that later.”

“Yes, later. But I wanted to see you,” said Levin, looking with hatred
at Grinevitch’s hand.

Stepan Arkadyevitch gave a scarcely perceptible smile.

“How was it you used to say you would never wear European dress again?”
he said, scanning his new suit, obviously cut by a French tailor. “Ah!
I see: a new phase.”

Levin suddenly blushed, not as grown men blush, slightly, without being
themselves aware of it, but as boys blush, feeling that they are
ridiculous through their shyness, and consequently ashamed of it and
blushing still more, almost to the point of tears. And it was so
strange to see this sensible, manly face in such a childish plight,
that Oblonsky left off looking at him.

“Oh, where shall we meet? You know I want very much to talk to you,”
said Levin.

Oblonsky seemed to ponder.

“I’ll tell you what: let’s go to Gurin’s to lunch, and there we can
talk. I am free till three.”

“No,” answered Levin, after an instant’s thought, “I have got to go on
somewhere else.”

“All right, then, let’s dine together.”

“Dine together? But I have nothing very particular, only a few words to
say, and a question I want to ask you, and we can have a talk
afterwards.”

“Well, say the few words, then, at once, and we’ll gossip after
dinner.”

“Well, it’s this,” said Levin; “but it’s of no importance, though.”

His face all at once took an expression of anger from the effort he was
making to surmount his shyness.

“What are the Shtcherbatskys doing? Everything as it used to be?” he
said.

Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had long known that Levin was in love with his
sister-in-law, Kitty, gave a hardly perceptible smile, and his eyes
sparkled merrily.

“You said a few words, but I can’t answer in a few words, because....
Excuse me a minute....”

A secretary came in, with respectful familiarity and the modest
consciousness, characteristic of every secretary, of superiority to his
chief in the knowledge of their business; he went up to Oblonsky with
some papers, and began, under pretense of asking a question, to explain
some objection. Stepan Arkadyevitch, without hearing him out, laid his
hand genially on the secretary’s sleeve.

“No, you do as I told you,” he said, softening his words with a smile,
and with a brief explanation of his view of the matter he turned away
from the papers, and said: “So do it that way, if you please, Zahar
Nikititch.”

The secretary retired in confusion. During the consultation with the
secretary Levin had completely recovered from his embarrassment. He was
standing with his elbows on the back of a chair, and on his face was a
look of ironical attention.

“I don’t understand it, I don’t understand it,” he said.

“What don’t you understand?” said Oblonsky, smiling as brightly as
ever, and picking up a cigarette. He expected some queer outburst from
Levin.

“I don’t understand what you are doing,” said Levin, shrugging his
shoulders. “How can you do it seriously?”

“Why not?”

“Why, because there’s nothing in it.”

“You think so, but we’re overwhelmed with work.”

“On paper. But, there, you’ve a gift for it,” added Levin.

“That’s to say, you think there’s a lack of something in me?”

“Perhaps so,” said Levin. “But all the same I admire your grandeur, and
am proud that I’ve a friend in such a great person. You’ve not answered
my question, though,” he went on, with a desperate effort looking
Oblonsky straight in the face.

“Oh, that’s all very well. You wait a bit, and you’ll come to this
yourself. It’s very nice for you to have over six thousand acres in the
Karazinsky district, and such muscles, and the freshness of a girl of
twelve; still you’ll be one of us one day. Yes, as to your question,
there is no change, but it’s a pity you’ve been away so long.”

“Oh, why so?” Levin queried, panic-stricken.

“Oh, nothing,” responded Oblonsky. “We’ll talk it over. But what’s
brought you up to town?”

“Oh, we’ll talk about that, too, later on,” said Levin, reddening again
up to his ears.

“All right. I see,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “I should ask you to come
to us, you know, but my wife’s not quite the thing. But I tell you
what; if you want to see them, they’re sure now to be at the Zoological
Gardens from four to five. Kitty skates. You drive along there, and
I’ll come and fetch you, and we’ll go and dine somewhere together.”

“Capital. So good-bye till then.”

“Now mind, you’ll forget, I know you, or rush off home to the country!”
Stepan Arkadyevitch called out laughing.

“No, truly!”

And Levin went out of the room, only when he was in the doorway
remembering that he had forgotten to take leave of Oblonsky’s
colleagues.

“That gentleman must be a man of great energy,” said Grinevitch, when
Levin had gone away.

“Yes, my dear boy,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, nodding his head, “he’s a
lucky fellow! Over six thousand acres in the Karazinsky district;
everything before him; and what youth and vigor! Not like some of us.”

“You have a great deal to complain of, haven’t you, Stepan
Arkadyevitch?”

“Ah, yes, I’m in a poor way, a bad way,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with
a heavy sigh.


Chapter 6

When Oblonsky asked Levin what had brought him to town, Levin blushed,
and was furious with himself for blushing, because he could not answer,
“I have come to make your sister-in-law an offer,” though that was
precisely what he had come for.

The families of the Levins and the Shtcherbatskys were old, noble
Moscow families, and had always been on intimate and friendly terms.
This intimacy had grown still closer during Levin’s student days. He
had both prepared for the university with the young Prince
Shtcherbatsky, the brother of Kitty and Dolly, and had entered at the
same time with him. In those days Levin used often to be in the
Shtcherbatskys’ house, and he was in love with the Shtcherbatsky
household. Strange as it may appear, it was with the household, the
family, that Konstantin Levin was in love, especially with the feminine
half of the household. Levin did not remember his own mother, and his
only sister was older than he was, so that it was in the
Shtcherbatskys’ house that he saw for the first time that inner life of
an old, noble, cultivated, and honorable family of which he had been
deprived by the death of his father and mother. All the members of that
family, especially the feminine half, were pictured by him, as it were,
wrapped about with a mysterious poetical veil, and he not only
perceived no defects whatever in them, but under the poetical veil that
shrouded them he assumed the existence of the loftiest sentiments and
every possible perfection. Why it was the three young ladies had one
day to speak French, and the next English; why it was that at certain
hours they played by turns on the piano, the sounds of which were
audible in their brother’s room above, where the students used to work;
why they were visited by those professors of French literature, of
music, of drawing, of dancing; why at certain hours all the three young
ladies, with Mademoiselle Linon, drove in the coach to the Tversky
boulevard, dressed in their satin cloaks, Dolly in a long one, Natalia
in a half-long one, and Kitty in one so short that her shapely legs in
tightly-drawn red stockings were visible to all beholders; why it was
they had to walk about the Tversky boulevard escorted by a footman with
a gold cockade in his hat—all this and much more that was done in their
mysterious world he did not understand, but he was sure that everything
that was done there was very good, and he was in love precisely with
the mystery of the proceedings.

In his student days he had all but been in love with the eldest, Dolly,
but she was soon married to Oblonsky. Then he began being in love with
the second. He felt, as it were, that he had to be in love with one of
the sisters, only he could not quite make out which. But Natalia, too,
had hardly made her appearance in the world when she married the
diplomat Lvov. Kitty was still a child when Levin left the university.
Young Shtcherbatsky went into the navy, was drowned in the Baltic, and
Levin’s relations with the Shtcherbatskys, in spite of his friendship
with Oblonsky, became less intimate. But when early in the winter of
this year Levin came to Moscow, after a year in the country, and saw
the Shtcherbatskys, he realized which of the three sisters he was
indeed destined to love.

One would have thought that nothing could be simpler than for him, a
man of good family, rather rich than poor, and thirty-two years old, to
make the young Princess Shtcherbatskaya an offer of marriage; in all
likelihood he would at once have been looked upon as a good match. But
Levin was in love, and so it seemed to him that Kitty was so perfect in
every respect that she was a creature far above everything earthly; and
that he was a creature so low and so earthly that it could not even be
conceived that other people and she herself could regard him as worthy
of her.

After spending two months in Moscow in a state of enchantment, seeing
Kitty almost every day in society, into which he went so as to meet
her, he abruptly decided that it could not be, and went back to the
country.

Levin’s conviction that it could not be was founded on the idea that in
the eyes of her family he was a disadvantageous and worthless match for
the charming Kitty, and that Kitty herself could not love him. In her
family’s eyes he had no ordinary, definite career and position in
society, while his contemporaries by this time, when he was thirty-two,
were already, one a colonel, and another a professor, another director
of a bank and railways, or president of a board like Oblonsky. But he
(he knew very well how he must appear to others) was a country
gentleman, occupied in breeding cattle, shooting game, and building
barns; in other words, a fellow of no ability, who had not turned out
well, and who was doing just what, according to the ideas of the world,
is done by people fit for nothing else.

The mysterious, enchanting Kitty herself could not love such an ugly
person as he conceived himself to be, and, above all, such an ordinary,
in no way striking person. Moreover, his attitude to Kitty in the
past—the attitude of a grown-up person to a child, arising from his
friendship with her brother—seemed to him yet another obstacle to love.
An ugly, good-natured man, as he considered himself, might, he
supposed, be liked as a friend; but to be loved with such a love as
that with which he loved Kitty, one would need to be a handsome and,
still more, a distinguished man.

He had heard that women often did care for ugly and ordinary men, but
he did not believe it, for he judged by himself, and he could not
himself have loved any but beautiful, mysterious, and exceptional
women.

But after spending two months alone in the country, he was convinced
that this was not one of those passions of which he had had experience
in his early youth; that this feeling gave him not an instant’s rest;
that he could not live without deciding the question, would she or
would she not be his wife, and that his despair had arisen only from
his own imaginings, that he had no sort of proof that he would be
rejected. And he had now come to Moscow with a firm determination to
make an offer, and get married if he were accepted. Or ... he could not
conceive what would become of him if he were rejected.


Chapter 7

On arriving in Moscow by a morning train, Levin had put up at the house
of his elder half-brother, Koznishev. After changing his clothes he
went down to his brother’s study, intending to talk to him at once
about the object of his visit, and to ask his advice; but his brother
was not alone. With him there was a well-known professor of philosophy,
who had come from Harkov expressly to clear up a difference that had
arisen between them on a very important philosophical question. The
professor was carrying on a hot crusade against materialists. Sergey
Koznishev had been following this crusade with interest, and after
reading the professor’s last article, he had written him a letter
stating his objections. He accused the professor of making too great
concessions to the materialists. And the professor had promptly
appeared to argue the matter out. The point in discussion was the
question then in vogue: Is there a line to be drawn between
psychological and physiological phenomena in man? and if so, where?

Sergey Ivanovitch met his brother with the smile of chilly friendliness
he always had for everyone, and introducing him to the professor, went
on with the conversation.

A little man in spectacles, with a narrow forehead, tore himself from
the discussion for an instant to greet Levin, and then went on talking
without paying any further attention to him. Levin sat down to wait
till the professor should go, but he soon began to get interested in
the subject under discussion.

Levin had come across the magazine articles about which they were
disputing, and had read them, interested in them as a development of
the first principles of science, familiar to him as a natural science
student at the university. But he had never connected these scientific
deductions as to the origin of man as an animal, as to reflex action,
biology, and sociology, with those questions as to the meaning of life
and death to himself, which had of late been more and more often in his
mind.

As he listened to his brother’s argument with the professor, he noticed
that they connected these scientific questions with those spiritual
problems, that at times they almost touched on the latter; but every
time they were close upon what seemed to him the chief point, they
promptly beat a hasty retreat, and plunged again into a sea of subtle
distinctions, reservations, quotations, allusions, and appeals to
authorities, and it was with difficulty that he understood what they
were talking about.

“I cannot admit it,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, with his habitual
clearness, precision of expression, and elegance of phrase. “I cannot
in any case agree with Keiss that my whole conception of the external
world has been derived from perceptions. The most fundamental idea, the
idea of existence, has not been received by me through sensation;
indeed, there is no special sense-organ for the transmission of such an
idea.”

“Yes, but they—Wurt, and Knaust, and Pripasov—would answer that your
consciousness of existence is derived from the conjunction of all your
sensations, that that consciousness of existence is the result of your
sensations. Wurt, indeed, says plainly that, assuming there are no
sensations, it follows that there is no idea of existence.”

“I maintain the contrary,” began Sergey Ivanovitch.

But here it seemed to Levin that just as they were close upon the real
point of the matter, they were again retreating, and he made up his
mind to put a question to the professor.

“According to that, if my senses are annihilated, if my body is dead, I
can have no existence of any sort?” he queried.

The professor, in annoyance, and, as it were, mental suffering at the
interruption, looked round at the strange inquirer, more like a
bargeman than a philosopher, and turned his eyes upon Sergey
Ivanovitch, as though to ask: What’s one to say to him? But Sergey
Ivanovitch, who had been talking with far less heat and one-sidedness
than the professor, and who had sufficient breadth of mind to answer
the professor, and at the same time to comprehend the simple and
natural point of view from which the question was put, smiled and said:

“That question we have no right to answer as yet.”

“We have not the requisite data,” chimed in the professor, and he went
back to his argument. “No,” he said; “I would point out the fact that
if, as Pripasov directly asserts, perception is based on sensation,
then we are bound to distinguish sharply between these two
conceptions.”

Levin listened no more, and simply waited for the professor to go.


Chapter 8

When the professor had gone, Sergey Ivanovitch turned to his brother.

“Delighted that you’ve come. For some time, is it? How’s your farming
getting on?”

Levin knew that his elder brother took little interest in farming, and
only put the question in deference to him, and so he only told him
about the sale of his wheat and money matters.

Levin had meant to tell his brother of his determination to get
married, and to ask his advice; he had indeed firmly resolved to do so.
But after seeing his brother, listening to his conversation with the
professor, hearing afterwards the unconsciously patronizing tone in
which his brother questioned him about agricultural matters (their
mother’s property had not been divided, and Levin took charge of both
their shares), Levin felt that he could not for some reason begin to
talk to him of his intention of marrying. He felt that his brother
would not look at it as he would have wished him to.

“Well, how is your district council doing?” asked Sergey Ivanovitch,
who was greatly interested in these local boards and attached great
importance to them.

“I really don’t know.”

“What! Why, surely you’re a member of the board?”

“No, I’m not a member now; I’ve resigned,” answered Levin, “and I no
longer attend the meetings.”

“What a pity!” commented Sergey Ivanovitch, frowning.

Levin in self-defense began to describe what took place in the meetings
in his district.

“That’s how it always is!” Sergey Ivanovitch interrupted him. “We
Russians are always like that. Perhaps it’s our strong point, really,
the faculty of seeing our own shortcomings; but we overdo it, we
comfort ourselves with irony which we always have on the tip of our
tongues. All I say is, give such rights as our local self-government to
any other European people—why, the Germans or the English would have
worked their way to freedom from them, while we simply turn them into
ridicule.”

“But how can it be helped?” said Levin penitently. “It was my last
effort. And I did try with all my soul. I can’t. I’m no good at it.”

“It’s not that you’re no good at it,” said Sergey Ivanovitch; “it is
that you don’t look at it as you should.”

“Perhaps not,” Levin answered dejectedly.

“Oh! do you know brother Nikolay’s turned up again?”

This brother Nikolay was the elder brother of Konstantin Levin, and
half-brother of Sergey Ivanovitch; a man utterly ruined, who had
dissipated the greater part of his fortune, was living in the strangest
and lowest company, and had quarreled with his brothers.

“What did you say?” Levin cried with horror. “How do you know?”

“Prokofy saw him in the street.”

“Here in Moscow? Where is he? Do you know?” Levin got up from his
chair, as though on the point of starting off at once.

“I am sorry I told you,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, shaking his head at
his younger brother’s excitement. “I sent to find out where he is
living, and sent him his IOU to Trubin, which I paid. This is the
answer he sent me.”

And Sergey Ivanovitch took a note from under a paper-weight and handed
it to his brother.

Levin read in the queer, familiar handwriting: “I humbly beg you to
leave me in peace. That’s the only favor I ask of my gracious
brothers.—Nikolay Levin.”

Levin read it, and without raising his head stood with the note in his
hands opposite Sergey Ivanovitch.

There was a struggle in his heart between the desire to forget his
unhappy brother for the time, and the consciousness that it would be
base to do so.

“He obviously wants to offend me,” pursued Sergey Ivanovitch; “but he
cannot offend me, and I should have wished with all my heart to assist
him, but I know it’s impossible to do that.”

“Yes, yes,” repeated Levin. “I understand and appreciate your attitude
to him; but I shall go and see him.”

“If you want to, do; but I shouldn’t advise it,” said Sergey
Ivanovitch. “As regards myself, I have no fear of your doing so; he
will not make you quarrel with me; but for your own sake, I should say
you would do better not to go. You can’t do him any good; still, do as
you please.”

“Very likely I can’t do any good, but I feel—especially at such a
moment—but that’s another thing—I feel I could not be at peace.”

“Well, that I don’t understand,” said Sergey Ivanovitch. “One thing I
do understand,” he added; “it’s a lesson in humility. I have come to
look very differently and more charitably on what is called infamous
since brother Nikolay has become what he is ... you know what he
did....”

“Oh, it’s awful, awful!” repeated Levin.

After obtaining his brother’s address from Sergey Ivanovitch’s footman,
Levin was on the point of setting off at once to see him, but on second
thought he decided to put off his visit till the evening. The first
thing to do to set his heart at rest was to accomplish what he had come
to Moscow for. From his brother’s Levin went to Oblonsky’s office, and
on getting news of the Shtcherbatskys from him, he drove to the place
where he had been told he might find Kitty.


Chapter 9

At four o’clock, conscious of his throbbing heart, Levin stepped out of
a hired sledge at the Zoological Gardens, and turned along the path to
the frozen mounds and the skating ground, knowing that he would
certainly find her there, as he had seen the Shtcherbatskys’ carriage
at the entrance.

It was a bright, frosty day. Rows of carriages, sledges, drivers, and
policemen were standing in the approach. Crowds of well-dressed people,
with hats bright in the sun, swarmed about the entrance and along the
well-swept little paths between the little houses adorned with carving
in the Russian style. The old curly birches of the gardens, all their
twigs laden with snow, looked as though freshly decked in sacred
vestments.

He walked along the path towards the skating-ground, and kept saying to
himself—“You mustn’t be excited, you must be calm. What’s the matter
with you? What do you want? Be quiet, stupid,” he conjured his heart.
And the more he tried to compose himself, the more breathless he found
himself. An acquaintance met him and called him by his name, but Levin
did not even recognize him. He went towards the mounds, whence came the
clank of the chains of sledges as they slipped down or were dragged up,
the rumble of the sliding sledges, and the sounds of merry voices. He
walked on a few steps, and the skating-ground lay open before his eyes,
and at once, amidst all the skaters, he knew her.

He knew she was there by the rapture and the terror that seized on his
heart. She was standing talking to a lady at the opposite end of the
ground. There was apparently nothing striking either in her dress or
her attitude. But for Levin she was as easy to find in that crowd as a
rose among nettles. Everything was made bright by her. She was the
smile that shed light on all round her. “Is it possible I can go over
there on the ice, go up to her?” he thought. The place where she stood
seemed to him a holy shrine, unapproachable, and there was one moment
when he was almost retreating, so overwhelmed was he with terror. He
had to make an effort to master himself, and to remind himself that
people of all sorts were moving about her, and that he too might come
there to skate. He walked down, for a long while avoiding looking at
her as at the sun, but seeing her, as one does the sun, without
looking.

On that day of the week and at that time of day people of one set, all
acquainted with one another, used to meet on the ice. There were crack
skaters there, showing off their skill, and learners clinging to chairs
with timid, awkward movements, boys, and elderly people skating with
hygienic motives. They seemed to Levin an elect band of blissful beings
because they were here, near her. All the skaters, it seemed, with
perfect self-possession, skated towards her, skated by her, even spoke
to her, and were happy, quite apart from her, enjoying the capital ice
and the fine weather.

Nikolay Shtcherbatsky, Kitty’s cousin, in a short jacket and tight
trousers, was sitting on a garden seat with his skates on. Seeing
Levin, he shouted to him:

“Ah, the first skater in Russia! Been here long? First-rate ice—do put
your skates on.”

“I haven’t got my skates,” Levin answered, marveling at this boldness
and ease in her presence, and not for one second losing sight of her,
though he did not look at her. He felt as though the sun were coming
near him. She was in a corner, and turning out her slender feet in
their high boots with obvious timidity, she skated towards him. A boy
in Russian dress, desperately waving his arms and bowed down to the
ground, overtook her. She skated a little uncertainly; taking her hands
out of the little muff that hung on a cord, she held them ready for
emergency, and looking towards Levin, whom she had recognized, she
smiled at him, and at her own fears. When she had got round the turn,
she gave herself a push off with one foot, and skated straight up to
Shtcherbatsky. Clutching at his arm, she nodded smiling to Levin. She
was more splendid than he had imagined her.

When he thought of her, he could call up a vivid picture of her to
himself, especially the charm of that little fair head, so freely set
on the shapely girlish shoulders, and so full of childish brightness
and good humor. The childishness of her expression, together with the
delicate beauty of her figure, made up her special charm, and that he
fully realized. But what always struck him in her as something unlooked
for, was the expression of her eyes, soft, serene, and truthful, and
above all, her smile, which always transported Levin to an enchanted
world, where he felt himself softened and tender, as he remembered
himself in some days of his early childhood.

“Have you been here long?” she said, giving him her hand. “Thank you,”
she added, as he picked up the handkerchief that had fallen out of her
muff.

“I? I’ve not long ... yesterday ... I mean today ... I arrived,”
answered Levin, in his emotion not at once understanding her question.
“I was meaning to come and see you,” he said; and then, recollecting
with what intention he was trying to see her, he was promptly overcome
with confusion and blushed.

“I didn’t know you could skate, and skate so well.”

She looked at him earnestly, as though wishing to make out the cause of
his confusion.

“Your praise is worth having. The tradition is kept up here that you
are the best of skaters,” she said, with her little black-gloved hand
brushing a grain of hoarfrost off her muff.

“Yes, I used once to skate with passion; I wanted to reach perfection.”

“You do everything with passion, I think,” she said smiling. “I should
so like to see how you skate. Put on skates, and let us skate
together.”

“Skate together! Can that be possible?” thought Levin, gazing at her.

“I’ll put them on directly,” he said.

And he went off to get skates.

“It’s a long while since we’ve seen you here, sir,” said the attendant,
supporting his foot, and screwing on the heel of the skate. “Except
you, there’s none of the gentlemen first-rate skaters. Will that be all
right?” said he, tightening the strap.

“Oh, yes, yes; make haste, please,” answered Levin, with difficulty
restraining the smile of rapture which would overspread his face.
“Yes,” he thought, “this now is life, this is happiness! _Together,_
she said; _let us skate together!_ Speak to her now? But that’s just
why I’m afraid to speak—because I’m happy now, happy in hope,
anyway.... And then?... But I must! I must! I must! Away with
weakness!”

Levin rose to his feet, took off his overcoat, and scurrying over the
rough ice round the hut, came out on the smooth ice and skated without
effort, as it were, by simple exercise of will, increasing and
slackening speed and turning his course. He approached with timidity,
but again her smile reassured him.

She gave him her hand, and they set off side by side, going faster and
faster, and the more rapidly they moved the more tightly she grasped
his hand.

“With you I should soon learn; I somehow feel confidence in you,” she
said to him.

“And I have confidence in myself when you are leaning on me,” he said,
but was at once panic-stricken at what he had said, and blushed. And
indeed, no sooner had he uttered these words, when all at once, like
the sun going behind a cloud, her face lost all its friendliness, and
Levin detected the familiar change in her expression that denoted the
working of thought; a crease showed on her smooth brow.

“Is there anything troubling you?—though I’ve no right to ask such a
question,” he added hurriedly.

“Oh, why so?... No, I have nothing to trouble me,” she responded
coldly; and she added immediately: “You haven’t seen Mlle. Linon, have
you?”

“Not yet.”

“Go and speak to her, she likes you so much.”

“What’s wrong? I have offended her. Lord help me!” thought Levin, and
he flew towards the old Frenchwoman with the gray ringlets, who was
sitting on a bench. Smiling and showing her false teeth, she greeted
him as an old friend.

“Yes, you see we’re growing up,” she said to him, glancing towards
Kitty, “and growing old. _Tiny bear_ has grown big now!” pursued the
Frenchwoman, laughing, and she reminded him of his joke about the three
young ladies whom he had compared to the three bears in the English
nursery tale. “Do you remember that’s what you used to call them?”

He remembered absolutely nothing, but she had been laughing at the joke
for ten years now, and was fond of it.

“Now, go and skate, go and skate. Our Kitty has learned to skate
nicely, hasn’t she?”

When Levin darted up to Kitty her face was no longer stern; her eyes
looked at him with the same sincerity and friendliness, but Levin
fancied that in her friendliness there was a certain note of deliberate
composure. And he felt depressed. After talking a little of her old
governess and her peculiarities, she questioned him about his life.

“Surely you must be dull in the country in the winter, aren’t you?” she
said.

“No, I’m not dull, I am very busy,” he said, feeling that she was
holding him in check by her composed tone, which he would not have the
force to break through, just as it had been at the beginning of the
winter.

“Are you going to stay in town long?” Kitty questioned him.

“I don’t know,” he answered, not thinking of what he was saying. The
thought that if he were held in check by her tone of quiet friendliness
he would end by going back again without deciding anything came into
his mind, and he resolved to make a struggle against it.

“How is it you don’t know?”

“I don’t know. It depends upon you,” he said, and was immediately
horror-stricken at his own words.

Whether it was that she had heard his words, or that she did not want
to hear them, she made a sort of stumble, twice struck out, and
hurriedly skated away from him. She skated up to Mlle. Linon, said
something to her, and went towards the pavilion where the ladies took
off their skates.

“My God! what have I done! Merciful God! help me, guide me,” said
Levin, praying inwardly, and at the same time, feeling a need of
violent exercise, he skated about describing inner and outer circles.

At that moment one of the young men, the best of the skaters of the
day, came out of the coffee-house in his skates, with a cigarette in
his mouth. Taking a run, he dashed down the steps in his skates,
crashing and bounding up and down. He flew down, and without even
changing the position of his hands, skated away over the ice.

“Ah, that’s a new trick!” said Levin, and he promptly ran up to the top
to do this new trick.

“Don’t break your neck! it needs practice!” Nikolay Shtcherbatsky
shouted after him.

Levin went to the steps, took a run from above as best he could, and
dashed down, preserving his balance in this unwonted movement with his
hands. On the last step he stumbled, but barely touching the ice with
his hand, with a violent effort recovered himself, and skated off,
laughing.

“How splendid, how nice he is!” Kitty was thinking at that time, as she
came out of the pavilion with Mlle. Linon, and looked towards him with
a smile of quiet affection, as though he were a favorite brother. “And
can it be my fault, can I have done anything wrong? They talk of
flirtation. I know it’s not he that I love; but still I am happy with
him, and he’s so jolly. Only, why did he say that?...” she mused.

Catching sight of Kitty going away, and her mother meeting her at the
steps, Levin, flushed from his rapid exercise, stood still and pondered
a minute. He took off his skates, and overtook the mother and daughter
at the entrance of the gardens.

“Delighted to see you,” said Princess Shtcherbatskaya. “On Thursdays we
are home, as always.”

“Today, then?”

“We shall be pleased to see you,” the princess said stiffly.

This stiffness hurt Kitty, and she could not resist the desire to
smooth over her mother’s coldness. She turned her head, and with a
smile said:

“Good-bye till this evening.”

At that moment Stepan Arkadyevitch, his hat cocked on one side, with
beaming face and eyes, strode into the garden like a conquering hero.
But as he approached his mother-in-law, he responded in a mournful and
crestfallen tone to her inquiries about Dolly’s health. After a little
subdued and dejected conversation with his mother-in-law, he threw out
his chest again, and put his arm in Levin’s.

“Well, shall we set off?” he asked. “I’ve been thinking about you all
this time, and I’m very, very glad you’ve come,” he said, looking him
in the face with a significant air.

“Yes, come along,” answered Levin in ecstasy, hearing unceasingly the
sound of that voice saying, “Good-bye till this evening,” and seeing
the smile with which it was said.

“To the England or the Hermitage?”

“I don’t mind which.”

“All right, then, the England,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, selecting
that restaurant because he owed more there than at the Hermitage, and
consequently considered it mean to avoid it. “Have you got a sledge?
That’s first-rate, for I sent my carriage home.”

The friends hardly spoke all the way. Levin was wondering what that
change in Kitty’s expression had meant, and alternately assuring
himself that there was hope, and falling into despair, seeing clearly
that his hopes were insane, and yet all the while he felt himself quite
another man, utterly unlike what he had been before her smile and those
words, “Good-bye till this evening.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch was absorbed during the drive in composing the menu
of the dinner.

“You like turbot, don’t you?” he said to Levin as they were arriving.

“Eh?” responded Levin. “Turbot? Yes, I’m _awfully_ fond of turbot.”


Chapter 10

When Levin went into the restaurant with Oblonsky, he could not help
noticing a certain peculiarity of expression, as it were, a restrained
radiance, about the face and whole figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Oblonsky took off his overcoat, and with his hat over one ear walked
into the dining-room, giving directions to the Tatar waiters, who were
clustered about him in evening coats, bearing napkins. Bowing to right
and left to the people he met, and here as everywhere joyously greeting
acquaintances, he went up to the sideboard for a preliminary appetizer
of fish and vodka, and said to the painted Frenchwoman decked in
ribbons, lace, and ringlets, behind the counter, something so amusing
that even that Frenchwoman was moved to genuine laughter. Levin for his
part refrained from taking any vodka simply because he felt such a
loathing of that Frenchwoman, all made up, it seemed, of false hair,
_poudre de riz,_ and _vinaigre de toilette_. He made haste to move away
from her, as from a dirty place. His whole soul was filled with
memories of Kitty, and there was a smile of triumph and happiness
shining in his eyes.

“This way, your excellency, please. Your excellency won’t be disturbed
here,” said a particularly pertinacious, white-headed old Tatar with
immense hips and coat-tails gaping widely behind. “Walk in, your
excellency,” he said to Levin; by way of showing his respect to Stepan
Arkadyevitch, being attentive to his guest as well.

Instantly flinging a fresh cloth over the round table under the bronze
chandelier, though it already had a table cloth on it, he pushed up
velvet chairs, and came to a standstill before Stepan Arkadyevitch with
a napkin and a bill of fare in his hands, awaiting his commands.

“If you prefer it, your excellency, a private room will be free
directly; Prince Golistin with a lady. Fresh oysters have come in.”

“Ah! oysters.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch became thoughtful.

“How if we were to change our program, Levin?” he said, keeping his
finger on the bill of fare. And his face expressed serious hesitation.
“Are the oysters good? Mind now.”

“They’re Flensburg, your excellency. We’ve no Ostend.”

“Flensburg will do, but are they fresh?”

“Only arrived yesterday.”

“Well, then, how if we were to begin with oysters, and so change the
whole program? Eh?”

“It’s all the same to me. I should like cabbage soup and porridge
better than anything; but of course there’s nothing like that here.”

“_Porridge à la Russe,_ your honor would like?” said the Tatar, bending
down to Levin, like a nurse speaking to a child.

“No, joking apart, whatever you choose is sure to be good. I’ve been
skating, and I’m hungry. And don’t imagine,” he added, detecting a look
of dissatisfaction on Oblonsky’s face, “that I shan’t appreciate your
choice. I am fond of good things.”

“I should hope so! After all, it’s one of the pleasures of life,” said
Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Well, then, my friend, you give us two—or better
say three—dozen oysters, clear soup with vegetables....”

“_Printanière,_” prompted the Tatar. But Stepan Arkadyevitch apparently
did not care to allow him the satisfaction of giving the French names
of the dishes.

“With vegetables in it, you know. Then turbot with thick sauce, then
... roast beef; and mind it’s good. Yes, and capons, perhaps, and then
sweets.”

The Tatar, recollecting that it was Stepan Arkadyevitch’s way not to
call the dishes by the names in the French bill of fare, did not repeat
them after him, but could not resist rehearsing the whole menu to
himself according to the bill:—“_Soupe printanière, turbot, sauce
Beaumarchais, poulard à l’estragon, macédoine de fruits_ ... etc.,” and
then instantly, as though worked by springs, laying down one bound bill
of fare, he took up another, the list of wines, and submitted it to
Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“What shall we drink?”

“What you like, only not too much. Champagne,” said Levin.

“What! to start with? You’re right though, I dare say. Do you like the
white seal?”

“_Cachet blanc,_” prompted the Tatar.

“Very well, then, give us that brand with the oysters, and then we’ll
see.”

“Yes, sir. And what table wine?”

“You can give us Nuits. Oh, no, better the classic Chablis.”

“Yes, sir. And _your_ cheese, your excellency?”

“Oh, yes, Parmesan. Or would you like another?”

“No, it’s all the same to me,” said Levin, unable to suppress a smile.

And the Tatar ran off with flying coat-tails, and in five minutes
darted in with a dish of opened oysters on mother-of-pearl shells, and
a bottle between his fingers.

Stepan Arkadyevitch crushed the starchy napkin, tucked it into his
waistcoat, and settling his arms comfortably, started on the oysters.

“Not bad,” he said, stripping the oysters from the pearly shell with a
silver fork, and swallowing them one after another. “Not bad,” he
repeated, turning his dewy, brilliant eyes from Levin to the Tatar.

Levin ate the oysters indeed, though white bread and cheese would have
pleased him better. But he was admiring Oblonsky. Even the Tatar,
uncorking the bottle and pouring the sparkling wine into the delicate
glasses, glanced at Stepan Arkadyevitch, and settled his white cravat
with a perceptible smile of satisfaction.

“You don’t care much for oysters, do you?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
emptying his wine-glass, “or you’re worried about something. Eh?”

He wanted Levin to be in good spirits. But it was not that Levin was
not in good spirits; he was ill at ease. With what he had in his soul,
he felt sore and uncomfortable in the restaurant, in the midst of
private rooms where men were dining with ladies, in all this fuss and
bustle; the surroundings of bronzes, looking-glasses, gas, and
waiters—all of it was offensive to him. He was afraid of sullying what
his soul was brimful of.

“I? Yes, I am; but besides, all this bothers me,” he said. “You can’t
conceive how queer it all seems to a country person like me, as queer
as that gentleman’s nails I saw at your place....”

“Yes, I saw how much interested you were in poor Grinevitch’s nails,”
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing.

“It’s too much for me,” responded Levin. “Do try, now, and put yourself
in my place, take the point of view of a country person. We in the
country try to bring our hands into such a state as will be most
convenient for working with. So we cut our nails; sometimes we turn up
our sleeves. And here people purposely let their nails grow as long as
they will, and link on small saucers by way of studs, so that they can
do nothing with their hands.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled gaily.

“Oh, yes, that’s just a sign that he has no need to do coarse work. His
work is with the mind....”

“Maybe. But still it’s queer to me, just as at this moment it seems
queer to me that we country folks try to get our meals over as soon as
we can, so as to be ready for our work, while here are we trying to
drag out our meal as long as possible, and with that object eating
oysters....”

“Why, of course,” objected Stepan Arkadyevitch. “But that’s just the
aim of civilization—to make everything a source of enjoyment.”

“Well, if that’s its aim, I’d rather be a savage.”

“And so you are a savage. All you Levins are savages.”

Levin sighed. He remembered his brother Nikolay, and felt ashamed and
sore, and he scowled; but Oblonsky began speaking of a subject which at
once drew his attention.

“Oh, I say, are you going tonight to our people, the Shtcherbatskys’, I
mean?” he said, his eyes sparkling significantly as he pushed away the
empty rough shells, and drew the cheese towards him.

“Yes, I shall certainly go,” replied Levin; “though I fancied the
princess was not very warm in her invitation.”

“What nonsense! That’s her manner.... Come, boy, the soup!... That’s
her manner—_grande dame,_” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “I’m coming, too,
but I have to go to the Countess Bonina’s rehearsal. Come, isn’t it
true that you’re a savage? How do you explain the sudden way in which
you vanished from Moscow? The Shtcherbatskys were continually asking me
about you, as though I ought to know. The only thing I know is that you
always do what no one else does.”

“Yes,” said Levin, slowly and with emotion, “you’re right. I am a
savage. Only, my savageness is not in having gone away, but in coming
now. Now I have come....”

“Oh, what a lucky fellow you are!” broke in Stepan Arkadyevitch,
looking into Levin’s eyes.

“Why?”

“‘I know a gallant steed by tokens sure,

And by his eyes I know a youth in love,’”



declaimed Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Everything is before you.”

“Why, is it over for you already?”

“No; not over exactly, but the future is yours, and the present is
mine, and the present—well, it’s not all that it might be.”

“How so?”

“Oh, things go wrong. But I don’t want to talk of myself, and besides I
can’t explain it all,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Well, why have you
come to Moscow, then?... Hi! take away!” he called to the Tatar.

“You guess?” responded Levin, his eyes like deep wells of light fixed
on Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“I guess, but I can’t be the first to talk about it. You can see by
that whether I guess right or wrong,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, gazing
at Levin with a subtle smile.

“Well, and what have you to say to me?” said Levin in a quivering
voice, feeling that all the muscles of his face were quivering too.
“How do you look at the question?”

Stepan Arkadyevitch slowly emptied his glass of Chablis, never taking
his eyes off Levin.

“I?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, “there’s nothing I desire so much as
that—nothing! It would be the best thing that could be.”

“But you’re not making a mistake? You know what we’re speaking of?”
said Levin, piercing him with his eyes. “You think it’s possible?”

“I think it’s possible. Why not possible?”

“No! do you really think it’s possible? No, tell me all you think! Oh,
but if ... if refusal’s in store for me!... Indeed I feel sure....”

“Why should you think that?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling at his
excitement.

“It seems so to me sometimes. That will be awful for me, and for her
too.”

“Oh, well, anyway there’s nothing awful in it for a girl. Every girl’s
proud of an offer.”

“Yes, every girl, but not she.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. He so well knew that feeling of Levin’s,
that for him all the girls in the world were divided into two classes:
one class—all the girls in the world except her, and those girls with
all sorts of human weaknesses, and very ordinary girls: the other
class—she alone, having no weaknesses of any sort and higher than all
humanity.

“Stay, take some sauce,” he said, holding back Levin’s hand as it
pushed away the sauce.

Levin obediently helped himself to sauce, but would not let Stepan
Arkadyevitch go on with his dinner.

“No, stop a minute, stop a minute,” he said. “You must understand that
it’s a question of life and death for me. I have never spoken to anyone
of this. And there’s no one I could speak of it to, except you. You
know we’re utterly unlike each other, different tastes and views and
everything; but I know you’re fond of me and understand me, and that’s
why I like you awfully. But for God’s sake, be quite straightforward
with me.”

“I tell you what I think,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling. “But I’ll
say more: my wife is a wonderful woman....” Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed,
remembering his position with his wife, and, after a moment’s silence,
resumed—“She has a gift of foreseeing things. She sees right through
people; but that’s not all; she knows what will come to pass,
especially in the way of marriages. She foretold, for instance, that
Princess Shahovskaya would marry Brenteln. No one would believe it, but
it came to pass. And she’s on your side.”

“How do you mean?”

“It’s not only that she likes you—she says that Kitty is certain to be
your wife.”

At these words Levin’s face suddenly lighted up with a smile, a smile
not far from tears of emotion.

“She says that!” cried Levin. “I always said she was exquisite, your
wife. There, that’s enough, enough said about it,” he said, getting up
from his seat.

“All right, but do sit down.”

But Levin could not sit down. He walked with his firm tread twice up
and down the little cage of a room, blinked his eyelids that his tears
might not fall, and only then sat down to the table.

“You must understand,” said he, “it’s not love. I’ve been in love, but
it’s not that. It’s not my feeling, but a sort of force outside me has
taken possession of me. I went away, you see, because I made up my mind
that it could never be, you understand, as a happiness that does not
come on earth; but I’ve struggled with myself, I see there’s no living
without it. And it must be settled.”

“What did you go away for?”

“Ah, stop a minute! Ah, the thoughts that come crowding on one! The
questions one must ask oneself! Listen. You can’t imagine what you’ve
done for me by what you said. I’m so happy that I’ve become positively
hateful; I’ve forgotten everything. I heard today that my brother
Nikolay ... you know, he’s here ... I had even forgotten him. It seems
to me that he’s happy too. It’s a sort of madness. But one thing’s
awful.... Here, you’ve been married, you know the feeling ... it’s
awful that we—old—with a past ... not of love, but of sins ... are
brought all at once so near to a creature pure and innocent; it’s
loathsome, and that’s why one can’t help feeling oneself unworthy.”

“Oh, well, you’ve not many sins on your conscience.”

“Alas! all the same,” said Levin, “when with loathing I go over my
life, I shudder and curse and bitterly regret it.... Yes.”

“What would you have? The world’s made so,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“The one comfort is like that prayer, which I always liked: ‘Forgive me
not according to my unworthiness, but according to Thy
loving-kindness.’ That’s the only way she can forgive me.”


Chapter 11

Levin emptied his glass, and they were silent for a while.

“There’s one other thing I ought to tell you. Do you know Vronsky?”
Stepan Arkadyevitch asked Levin.

“No, I don’t. Why do you ask?”

“Give us another bottle,” Stepan Arkadyevitch directed the Tatar, who
was filling up their glasses and fidgeting round them just when he was
not wanted.

“Why you ought to know Vronsky is that he’s one of your rivals.”

“Who’s Vronsky?” said Levin, and his face was suddenly transformed from
the look of childlike ecstasy which Oblonsky had just been admiring to
an angry and unpleasant expression.

“Vronsky is one of the sons of Count Kirill Ivanovitch Vronsky, and one
of the finest specimens of the gilded youth of Petersburg. I made his
acquaintance in Tver when I was there on official business, and he came
there for the levy of recruits. Fearfully rich, handsome, great
connections, an aide-de-camp, and with all that a very nice,
good-natured fellow. But he’s more than simply a good-natured fellow,
as I’ve found out here—he’s a cultivated man, too, and very
intelligent; he’s a man who’ll make his mark.”

Levin scowled and was dumb.

“Well, he turned up here soon after you’d gone, and as I can see, he’s
over head and ears in love with Kitty, and you know that her
mother....”

“Excuse me, but I know nothing,” said Levin, frowning gloomily. And
immediately he recollected his brother Nikolay and how hateful he was
to have been able to forget him.

“You wait a bit, wait a bit,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling and
touching his hand. “I’ve told you what I know, and I repeat that in
this delicate and tender matter, as far as one can conjecture, I
believe the chances are in your favor.”

Levin dropped back in his chair; his face was pale.

“But I would advise you to settle the thing as soon as may be,” pursued
Oblonsky, filling up his glass.

“No, thanks, I can’t drink any more,” said Levin, pushing away his
glass. “I shall be drunk.... Come, tell me how are you getting on?” he
went on, obviously anxious to change the conversation.

“One word more: in any case I advise you to settle the question soon.
Tonight I don’t advise you to speak,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Go
round tomorrow morning, make an offer in due form, and God bless
you....”

“Oh, do you still think of coming to me for some shooting? Come next
spring, do,” said Levin.

Now his whole soul was full of remorse that he had begun this
conversation with Stepan Arkadyevitch. A feeling such as his was
profaned by talk of the rivalry of some Petersburg officer, of the
suppositions and the counsels of Stepan Arkadyevitch.

Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. He knew what was passing in Levin’s soul.

“I’ll come some day,” he said. “But women, my boy, they’re the pivot
everything turns upon. Things are in a bad way with me, very bad. And
it’s all through women. Tell me frankly now,” he pursued, picking up a
cigar and keeping one hand on his glass; “give me your advice.”

“Why, what is it?”

“I’ll tell you. Suppose you’re married, you love your wife, but you’re
fascinated by another woman....”

“Excuse me, but I’m absolutely unable to comprehend how ... just as I
can’t comprehend how I could now, after my dinner, go straight to a
baker’s shop and steal a roll.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes sparkled more than usual.

“Why not? A roll will sometimes smell so good one can’t resist it.”

“Himmlisch ist’s, wenn ich bezwungen

    Meine irdische Begier;

Aber doch wenn’s nich gelungen

    Hatt’ ich auch recht hübsch Plaisir!”



As he said this, Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled subtly. Levin, too, could
not help smiling.

“Yes, but joking apart,” resumed Stepan Arkadyevitch, “you must
understand that the woman is a sweet, gentle loving creature, poor and
lonely, and has sacrificed everything. Now, when the thing’s done,
don’t you see, can one possibly cast her off? Even supposing one parts
from her, so as not to break up one’s family life, still, can one help
feeling for her, setting her on her feet, softening her lot?”

“Well, you must excuse me there. You know to me all women are divided
into two classes ... at least no ... truer to say: there are women and
there are ... I’ve never seen exquisite fallen beings, and I never
shall see them, but such creatures as that painted Frenchwoman at the
counter with the ringlets are vermin to my mind, and all fallen women
are the same.”

“But the Magdalen?”

“Ah, drop that! Christ would never have said those words if He had
known how they would be abused. Of all the Gospel those words are the
only ones remembered. However, I’m not saying so much what I think, as
what I feel. I have a loathing for fallen women. You’re afraid of
spiders, and I of these vermin. Most likely you’ve not made a study of
spiders and don’t know their character; and so it is with me.”

“It’s very well for you to talk like that; it’s very much like that
gentleman in Dickens who used to fling all difficult questions over his
right shoulder. But to deny the facts is no answer. What’s to be
done—you tell me that, what’s to be done? Your wife gets older, while
you’re full of life. Before you’ve time to look round, you feel that
you can’t love your wife with love, however much you may esteem her.
And then all at once love turns up, and you’re done for, done for,”
Stepan Arkadyevitch said with weary despair.

Levin half smiled.

“Yes, you’re done for,” resumed Oblonsky. “But what’s to be done?”

“Don’t steal rolls.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch laughed outright.

“Oh, moralist! But you must understand, there are two women; one
insists only on her rights, and those rights are your love, which you
can’t give her; and the other sacrifices everything for you and asks
for nothing. What are you to do? How are you to act? There’s a fearful
tragedy in it.”

“If you care for my profession of faith as regards that, I’ll tell you
that I don’t believe there was any tragedy about it. And this is why.
To my mind, love ... both the sorts of love, which you remember Plato
defines in his Banquet, served as the test of men. Some men only
understand one sort, and some only the other. And those who only know
the non-platonic love have no need to talk of tragedy. In such love
there can be no sort of tragedy. ‘I’m much obliged for the
gratification, my humble respects’—that’s all the tragedy. And in
platonic love there can be no tragedy, because in that love all is
clear and pure, because....”

At that instant Levin recollected his own sins and the inner conflict
he had lived through. And he added unexpectedly:

“But perhaps you are right. Very likely ... I don’t know, I don’t
know.”

“It’s this, don’t you see,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, “you’re very much
all of a piece. That’s your strong point and your failing. You have a
character that’s all of a piece, and you want the whole of life to be
of a piece too—but that’s not how it is. You despise public official
work because you want the reality to be invariably corresponding all
the while with the aim—and that’s not how it is. You want a man’s work,
too, always to have a defined aim, and love and family life always to
be undivided—and that’s not how it is. All the variety, all the charm,
all the beauty of life is made up of light and shadow.”

Levin sighed and made no reply. He was thinking of his own affairs, and
did not hear Oblonsky.

And suddenly both of them felt that though they were friends, though
they had been dining and drinking together, which should have drawn
them closer, yet each was thinking only of his own affairs, and they
had nothing to do with one another. Oblonsky had more than once
experienced this extreme sense of aloofness, instead of intimacy,
coming on after dinner, and he knew what to do in such cases.

“Bill!” he called, and he went into the next room where he promptly
came across an aide-de-camp of his acquaintance and dropped into
conversation with him about an actress and her protector. And at once
in the conversation with the aide-de-camp Oblonsky had a sense of
relaxation and relief after the conversation with Levin, which always
put him to too great a mental and spiritual strain.

When the Tatar appeared with a bill for twenty-six roubles and odd
kopecks, besides a tip for himself, Levin, who would another time have
been horrified, like anyone from the country, at his share of fourteen
roubles, did not notice it, paid, and set off homewards to dress and go
to the Shtcherbatskys’ there to decide his fate.


Chapter 12

The young Princess Kitty Shtcherbatskaya was eighteen. It was the first
winter that she had been out in the world. Her success in society had
been greater than that of either of her elder sisters, and greater even
than her mother had anticipated. To say nothing of the young men who
danced at the Moscow balls being almost all in love with Kitty, two
serious suitors had already this first winter made their appearance:
Levin, and immediately after his departure, Count Vronsky.

Levin’s appearance at the beginning of the winter, his frequent visits,
and evident love for Kitty, had led to the first serious conversations
between Kitty’s parents as to her future, and to disputes between them.
The prince was on Levin’s side; he said he wished for nothing better
for Kitty. The princess for her part, going round the question in the
manner peculiar to women, maintained that Kitty was too young, that
Levin had done nothing to prove that he had serious intentions, that
Kitty felt no great attraction to him, and other side issues; but she
did not state the principal point, which was that she looked for a
better match for her daughter, and that Levin was not to her liking,
and she did not understand him. When Levin had abruptly departed, the
princess was delighted, and said to her husband triumphantly: “You see
I was right.” When Vronsky appeared on the scene, she was still more
delighted, confirmed in her opinion that Kitty was to make not simply a
good, but a brilliant match.

In the mother’s eyes there could be no comparison between Vronsky and
Levin. She disliked in Levin his strange and uncompromising opinions
and his shyness in society, founded, as she supposed, on his pride and
his queer sort of life, as she considered it, absorbed in cattle and
peasants. She did not very much like it that he, who was in love with
her daughter, had kept coming to the house for six weeks, as though he
were waiting for something, inspecting, as though he were afraid he
might be doing them too great an honor by making an offer, and did not
realize that a man, who continually visits at a house where there is a
young unmarried girl, is bound to make his intentions clear. And
suddenly, without doing so, he disappeared. “It’s as well he’s not
attractive enough for Kitty to have fallen in love with him,” thought
the mother.

Vronsky satisfied all the mother’s desires. Very wealthy, clever, of
aristocratic family, on the highroad to a brilliant career in the army
and at court, and a fascinating man. Nothing better could be wished
for.

Vronsky openly flirted with Kitty at balls, danced with her, and came
continually to the house, consequently there could be no doubt of the
seriousness of his intentions. But, in spite of that, the mother had
spent the whole of that winter in a state of terrible anxiety and
agitation.

Princess Shtcherbatskaya had herself been married thirty years ago, her
aunt arranging the match. Her husband, about whom everything was well
known beforehand, had come, looked at his future bride, and been looked
at. The matchmaking aunt had ascertained and communicated their mutual
impression. That impression had been favorable. Afterwards, on a day
fixed beforehand, the expected offer was made to her parents, and
accepted. All had passed very simply and easily. So it seemed, at
least, to the princess. But over her own daughters she had felt how far
from simple and easy is the business, apparently so commonplace, of
marrying off one’s daughters. The panics that had been lived through,
the thoughts that had been brooded over, the money that had been
wasted, and the disputes with her husband over marrying the two elder
girls, Darya and Natalia! Now, since the youngest had come out, she was
going through the same terrors, the same doubts, and still more violent
quarrels with her husband than she had over the elder girls. The old
prince, like all fathers indeed, was exceedingly punctilious on the
score of the honor and reputation of his daughters. He was irrationally
jealous over his daughters, especially over Kitty, who was his
favorite. At every turn he had scenes with the princess for
compromising her daughter. The princess had grown accustomed to this
already with her other daughters, but now she felt that there was more
ground for the prince’s touchiness. She saw that of late years much was
changed in the manners of society, that a mother’s duties had become
still more difficult. She saw that girls of Kitty’s age formed some
sort of clubs, went to some sort of lectures, mixed freely in men’s
society; drove about the streets alone, many of them did not curtsey,
and, what was the most important thing, all the girls were firmly
convinced that to choose their husbands was their own affair, and not
their parents’. “Marriages aren’t made nowadays as they used to be,”
was thought and said by all these young girls, and even by their
elders. But how marriages were made now, the princess could not learn
from anyone. The French fashion—of the parents arranging their
children’s future—was not accepted; it was condemned. The English
fashion of the complete independence of girls was also not accepted,
and not possible in Russian society. The Russian fashion of matchmaking
by the offices of intermediate persons was for some reason considered
unseemly; it was ridiculed by everyone, and by the princess herself.
But how girls were to be married, and how parents were to marry them,
no one knew. Everyone with whom the princess had chanced to discuss the
matter said the same thing: “Mercy on us, it’s high time in our day to
cast off all that old-fashioned business. It’s the young people have to
marry; and not their parents; and so we ought to leave the young people
to arrange it as they choose.” It was very easy for anyone to say that
who had no daughters, but the princess realized that in the process of
getting to know each other, her daughter might fall in love, and fall
in love with someone who did not care to marry her or who was quite
unfit to be her husband. And, however much it was instilled into the
princess that in our times young people ought to arrange their lives
for themselves, she was unable to believe it, just as she would have
been unable to believe that, at any time whatever, the most suitable
playthings for children five years old ought to be loaded pistols. And
so the princess was more uneasy over Kitty than she had been over her
elder sisters.

Now she was afraid that Vronsky might confine himself to simply
flirting with her daughter. She saw that her daughter was in love with
him, but tried to comfort herself with the thought that he was an
honorable man, and would not do this. But at the same time she knew how
easy it is, with the freedom of manners of today, to turn a girl’s
head, and how lightly men generally regard such a crime. The week
before, Kitty had told her mother of a conversation she had with
Vronsky during a mazurka. This conversation had partly reassured the
princess; but perfectly at ease she could not be. Vronsky had told
Kitty that both he and his brother were so used to obeying their mother
that they never made up their minds to any important undertaking
without consulting her. “And just now, I am impatiently awaiting my
mother’s arrival from Petersburg, as peculiarly fortunate,” he told
her.

Kitty had repeated this without attaching any significance to the
words. But her mother saw them in a different light. She knew that the
old lady was expected from day to day, that she would be pleased at her
son’s choice, and she felt it strange that he should not make his offer
through fear of vexing his mother. However, she was so anxious for the
marriage itself, and still more for relief from her fears, that she
believed it was so. Bitter as it was for the princess to see the
unhappiness of her eldest daughter, Dolly, on the point of leaving her
husband, her anxiety over the decision of her youngest daughter’s fate
engrossed all her feelings. Today, with Levin’s reappearance, a fresh
source of anxiety arose. She was afraid that her daughter, who had at
one time, as she fancied, a feeling for Levin, might, from extreme
sense of honor, refuse Vronsky, and that Levin’s arrival might
generally complicate and delay the affair so near being concluded.

“Why, has he been here long?” the princess asked about Levin, as they
returned home.

“He came today, mamma.”

“There’s one thing I want to say....” began the princess, and from her
serious and alert face, Kitty guessed what it would be.

“Mamma,” she said, flushing hotly and turning quickly to her, “please,
please don’t say anything about that. I know, I know all about it.”

She wished for what her mother wished for, but the motives of her
mother’s wishes wounded her.

“I only want to say that to raise hopes....”

“Mamma, darling, for goodness’ sake, don’t talk about it. It’s so
horrible to talk about it.”

“I won’t,” said her mother, seeing the tears in her daughter’s eyes;
“but one thing, my love; you promised me you would have no secrets from
me. You won’t?”

“Never, mamma, none,” answered Kitty, flushing a little, and looking
her mother straight in the face, “but there’s no use in my telling you
anything, and I ... I ... if I wanted to, I don’t know what to say or
how.... I don’t know....”

“No, she could not tell an untruth with those eyes,” thought the
mother, smiling at her agitation and happiness. The princess smiled
that what was taking place just now in her soul seemed to the poor
child so immense and so important.


Chapter 13

After dinner, and till the beginning of the evening, Kitty was feeling
a sensation akin to the sensation of a young man before a battle. Her
heart throbbed violently, and her thoughts would not rest on anything.

She felt that this evening, when they would both meet for the first
time, would be a turning point in her life. And she was continually
picturing them to herself, at one moment each separately, and then both
together. When she mused on the past, she dwelt with pleasure, with
tenderness, on the memories of her relations with Levin. The memories
of childhood and of Levin’s friendship with her dead brother gave a
special poetic charm to her relations with him. His love for her, of
which she felt certain, was flattering and delightful to her; and it
was pleasant for her to think of Levin. In her memories of Vronsky
there always entered a certain element of awkwardness, though he was in
the highest degree well-bred and at ease, as though there were some
false note—not in Vronsky, he was very simple and nice, but in herself,
while with Levin she felt perfectly simple and clear. But, on the other
hand, directly she thought of the future with Vronsky, there arose
before her a perspective of brilliant happiness; with Levin the future
seemed misty.

When she went upstairs to dress, and looked into the looking-glass, she
noticed with joy that it was one of her good days, and that she was in
complete possession of all her forces,—she needed this so for what lay
before her: she was conscious of external composure and free grace in
her movements.

At half-past seven she had only just gone down into the drawing-room,
when the footman announced, “Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin.” The
princess was still in her room, and the prince had not come in. “So it
is to be,” thought Kitty, and all the blood seemed to rush to her
heart. She was horrified at her paleness, as she glanced into the
looking-glass. At that moment she knew beyond doubt that he had come
early on purpose to find her alone and to make her an offer. And only
then for the first time the whole thing presented itself in a new,
different aspect; only then she realized that the question did not
affect her only—with whom she would be happy, and whom she loved—but
that she would have that moment to wound a man whom she liked. And to
wound him cruelly. What for? Because he, dear fellow, loved her, was in
love with her. But there was no help for it, so it must be, so it would
have to be.

“My God! shall I myself really have to say it to him?” she thought.
“Can I tell him I don’t love him? That will be a lie. What am I to say
to him? That I love someone else? No, that’s impossible. I’m going
away, I’m going away.”

She had reached the door, when she heard his step. “No! it’s not
honest. What have I to be afraid of? I have done nothing wrong. What is
to be, will be! I’ll tell the truth. And with him one can’t be ill at
ease. Here he is,” she said to herself, seeing his powerful, shy
figure, with his shining eyes fixed on her. She looked straight into
his face, as though imploring him to spare her, and gave her hand.

“It’s not time yet; I think I’m too early,” he said glancing round the
empty drawing-room. When he saw that his expectations were realized,
that there was nothing to prevent him from speaking, his face became
gloomy.

“Oh, no,” said Kitty, and sat down at the table.

“But this was just what I wanted, to find you alone,” he began, not
sitting down, and not looking at her, so as not to lose courage.

“Mamma will be down directly. She was very much tired....
Yesterday....”

She talked on, not knowing what her lips were uttering, and not taking
her supplicating and caressing eyes off him.

He glanced at her; she blushed, and ceased speaking.

“I told you I did not know whether I should be here long ... that it
depended on you....”

She dropped her head lower and lower, not knowing herself what answer
she should make to what was coming.

“That it depended on you,” he repeated. “I meant to say ... I meant to
say ... I came for this ... to be my wife!” he brought out, not knowing
what he was saying; but feeling that the most terrible thing was said,
he stopped short and looked at her....

She was breathing heavily, not looking at him. She was feeling ecstasy.
Her soul was flooded with happiness. She had never anticipated that the
utterance of love would produce such a powerful effect on her. But it
lasted only an instant. She remembered Vronsky. She lifted her clear,
truthful eyes, and seeing his desperate face, she answered hastily:

“That cannot be ... forgive me.”

A moment ago, and how close she had been to him, of what importance in
his life! And how aloof and remote from him she had become now!

“It was bound to be so,” he said, not looking at her.

He bowed, and was meaning to retreat.


Chapter 14

But at that very moment the princess came in. There was a look of
horror on her face when she saw them alone, and their disturbed faces.
Levin bowed to her, and said nothing. Kitty did not speak nor lift her
eyes. “Thank God, she has refused him,” thought the mother, and her
face lighted up with the habitual smile with which she greeted her
guests on Thursdays. She sat down and began questioning Levin about his
life in the country. He sat down again, waiting for other visitors to
arrive, in order to retreat unnoticed.

Five minutes later there came in a friend of Kitty’s, married the
preceding winter, Countess Nordston.

She was a thin, sallow, sickly, and nervous woman, with brilliant black
eyes. She was fond of Kitty, and her affection for her showed itself,
as the affection of married women for girls always does, in the desire
to make a match for Kitty after her own ideal of married happiness; she
wanted her to marry Vronsky. Levin she had often met at the
Shtcherbatskys’ early in the winter, and she had always disliked him.
Her invariable and favorite pursuit, when they met, consisted in making
fun of him.

“I do like it when he looks down at me from the height of his grandeur,
or breaks off his learned conversation with me because I’m a fool, or
is condescending to me. I like that so; to see him condescending! I am
so glad he can’t bear me,” she used to say of him.

She was right, for Levin actually could not bear her, and despised her
for what she was proud of and regarded as a fine characteristic—her
nervousness, her delicate contempt and indifference for everything
coarse and earthly.

The Countess Nordston and Levin got into that relation with one another
not seldom seen in society, when two persons, who remain externally on
friendly terms, despise each other to such a degree that they cannot
even take each other seriously, and cannot even be offended by each
other.

The Countess Nordston pounced upon Levin at once.

“Ah, Konstantin Dmitrievitch! So you’ve come back to our corrupt
Babylon,” she said, giving him her tiny, yellow hand, and recalling
what he had chanced to say early in the winter, that Moscow was a
Babylon. “Come, is Babylon reformed, or have you degenerated?” she
added, glancing with a simper at Kitty.

“It’s very flattering for me, countess, that you remember my words so
well,” responded Levin, who had succeeded in recovering his composure,
and at once from habit dropped into his tone of joking hostility to the
Countess Nordston. “They must certainly make a great impression on
you.”

“Oh, I should think so! I always note them all down. Well, Kitty, have
you been skating again?...”

And she began talking to Kitty. Awkward as it was for Levin to withdraw
now, it would still have been easier for him to perpetrate this
awkwardness than to remain all the evening and see Kitty, who glanced
at him now and then and avoided his eyes. He was on the point of
getting up, when the princess, noticing that he was silent, addressed
him.

“Shall you be long in Moscow? You’re busy with the district council,
though, aren’t you, and can’t be away for long?”

“No, princess, I’m no longer a member of the council,” he said. “I have
come up for a few days.”

“There’s something the matter with him,” thought Countess Nordston,
glancing at his stern, serious face. “He isn’t in his old argumentative
mood. But I’ll draw him out. I do love making a fool of him before
Kitty, and I’ll do it.”

“Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” she said to him, “do explain to me, please,
what’s the meaning of it. You know all about such things. At home in
our village of Kaluga all the peasants and all the women have drunk up
all they possessed, and now they can’t pay us any rent. What’s the
meaning of that? You always praise the peasants so.”

At that instant another lady came into the room, and Levin got up.

“Excuse me, countess, but I really know nothing about it, and can’t
tell you anything,” he said, and looked round at the officer who came
in behind the lady.

“That must be Vronsky,” thought Levin, and, to be sure of it, glanced
at Kitty. She had already had time to look at Vronsky, and looked round
at Levin. And simply from the look in her eyes, that grew unconsciously
brighter, Levin knew that she loved that man, knew it as surely as if
she had told him so in words. But what sort of a man was he? Now,
whether for good or for ill, Levin could not choose but remain; he must
find out what the man was like whom she loved.

There are people who, on meeting a successful rival, no matter in what,
are at once disposed to turn their backs on everything good in him, and
to see only what is bad. There are people, on the other hand, who
desire above all to find in that lucky rival the qualities by which he
has outstripped them, and seek with a throbbing ache at heart only what
is good. Levin belonged to the second class. But he had no difficulty
in finding what was good and attractive in Vronsky. It was apparent at
the first glance. Vronsky was a squarely built, dark man, not very
tall, with a good-humored, handsome, and exceedingly calm and resolute
face. Everything about his face and figure, from his short-cropped
black hair and freshly shaven chin down to his loosely fitting,
brand-new uniform, was simple and at the same time elegant. Making way
for the lady who had come in, Vronsky went up to the princess and then
to Kitty.

As he approached her, his beautiful eyes shone with a specially tender
light, and with a faint, happy, and modestly triumphant smile (so it
seemed to Levin), bowing carefully and respectfully over her, he held
out his small broad hand to her.

Greeting and saying a few words to everyone, he sat down without once
glancing at Levin, who had never taken his eyes off him.

“Let me introduce you,” said the princess, indicating Levin.
“Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin, Count Alexey Kirillovitch Vronsky.”

Vronsky got up and, looking cordially at Levin, shook hands with him.

“I believe I was to have dined with you this winter,” he said, smiling
his simple and open smile; “but you had unexpectedly left for the
country.”

“Konstantin Dmitrievitch despises and hates town and us townspeople,”
said Countess Nordston.

“My words must make a deep impression on you, since you remember them
so well,” said Levin, and, suddenly conscious that he had said just the
same thing before, he reddened.

Vronsky looked at Levin and Countess Nordston, and smiled.

“Are you always in the country?” he inquired. “I should think it must
be dull in the winter.”

“It’s not dull if one has work to do; besides, one’s not dull by
oneself,” Levin replied abruptly.

“I am fond of the country,” said Vronsky, noticing, and affecting not
to notice, Levin’s tone.

“But I hope, count, you would not consent to live in the country
always,” said Countess Nordston.

“I don’t know; I have never tried for long. I experienced a queer
feeling once,” he went on. “I never longed so for the country, Russian
country, with bast shoes and peasants, as when I was spending a winter
with my mother in Nice. Nice itself is dull enough, you know. And
indeed, Naples and Sorrento are only pleasant for a short time. And
it’s just there that Russia comes back to me most vividly, and
especially the country. It’s as though....”

He talked on, addressing both Kitty and Levin, turning his serene,
friendly eyes from one to the other, and saying obviously just what
came into his head.

Noticing that Countess Nordston wanted to say something, he stopped
short without finishing what he had begun, and listened attentively to
her.

The conversation did not flag for an instant, so that the princess, who
always kept in reserve, in case a subject should be lacking, two heavy
guns—the relative advantages of classical and of modern education, and
universal military service—had not to move out either of them, while
Countess Nordston had not a chance of chaffing Levin.

Levin wanted to, and could not, take part in the general conversation;
saying to himself every instant, “Now go,” he still did not go, as
though waiting for something.

The conversation fell upon table-turning and spirits, and Countess
Nordston, who believed in spiritualism, began to describe the marvels
she had seen.

“Ah, countess, you really must take me, for pity’s sake do take me to
see them! I have never seen anything extraordinary, though I am always
on the lookout for it everywhere,” said Vronsky, smiling.

“Very well, next Saturday,” answered Countess Nordston. “But you,
Konstantin Dmitrievitch, do you believe in it?” she asked Levin.

“Why do you ask me? You know what I shall say.”

“But I want to hear your opinion.”

“My opinion,” answered Levin, “is only that this table-turning simply
proves that educated society—so called—is no higher than the peasants.
They believe in the evil eye, and in witchcraft and omens, while
we....”

“Oh, then you don’t believe in it?”

“I can’t believe in it, countess.”

“But if I’ve seen it myself?”

“The peasant women too tell us they have seen goblins.”

“Then you think I tell a lie?”

And she laughed a mirthless laugh.

“Oh, no, Masha, Konstantin Dmitrievitch said he could not believe in
it,” said Kitty, blushing for Levin, and Levin saw this, and, still
more exasperated, would have answered, but Vronsky with his bright
frank smile rushed to the support of the conversation, which was
threatening to become disagreeable.

“You do not admit the conceivability at all?” he queried. “But why not?
We admit the existence of electricity, of which we know nothing. Why
should there not be some new force, still unknown to us, which....”

“When electricity was discovered,” Levin interrupted hurriedly, “it was
only the phenomenon that was discovered, and it was unknown from what
it proceeded and what were its effects, and ages passed before its
applications were conceived. But the spiritualists have begun with
tables writing for them, and spirits appearing to them, and have only
later started saying that it is an unknown force.”

Vronsky listened attentively to Levin, as he always did listen,
obviously interested in his words.

“Yes, but the spiritualists say we don’t know at present what this
force is, but there is a force, and these are the conditions in which
it acts. Let the scientific men find out what the force consists in.
No, I don’t see why there should not be a new force, if it....”

“Why, because with electricity,” Levin interrupted again, “every time
you rub tar against wool, a recognized phenomenon is manifested, but in
this case it does not happen every time, and so it follows it is not a
natural phenomenon.”

Feeling probably that the conversation was taking a tone too serious
for a drawing-room, Vronsky made no rejoinder, but by way of trying to
change the conversation, he smiled brightly, and turned to the ladies.

“Do let us try at once, countess,” he said; but Levin would finish
saying what he thought.

“I think,” he went on, “that this attempt of the spiritualists to
explain their marvels as some sort of new natural force is most futile.
They boldly talk of spiritual force, and then try to subject it to
material experiment.”

Everyone was waiting for him to finish, and he felt it.

“And I think you would be a first-rate medium,” said Countess Nordston;
“there’s something enthusiastic in you.”

Levin opened his mouth, was about to say something, reddened, and said
nothing.

“Do let us try table-turning at once, please,” said Vronsky. “Princess,
will you allow it?”

And Vronsky stood up, looking for a little table.

Kitty got up to fetch a table, and as she passed, her eyes met Levin’s.
She felt for him with her whole heart, the more because she was pitying
him for suffering of which she was herself the cause. “If you can
forgive me, forgive me,” said her eyes, “I am so happy.”

“I hate them all, and you, and myself,” his eyes responded, and he took
up his hat. But he was not destined to escape. Just as they were
arranging themselves round the table, and Levin was on the point of
retiring, the old prince came in, and after greeting the ladies,
addressed Levin.

“Ah!” he began joyously. “Been here long, my boy? I didn’t even know
you were in town. Very glad to see you.” The old prince embraced Levin,
and talking to him did not observe Vronsky, who had risen, and was
serenely waiting till the prince should turn to him.

Kitty felt how distasteful her father’s warmth was to Levin after what
had happened. She saw, too, how coldly her father responded at last to
Vronsky’s bow, and how Vronsky looked with amiable perplexity at her
father, as though trying and failing to understand how and why anyone
could be hostilely disposed towards him, and she flushed.

“Prince, let us have Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” said Countess Nordston;
“we want to try an experiment.”

“What experiment? Table-turning? Well, you must excuse me, ladies and
gentlemen, but to my mind it is better fun to play the ring game,” said
the old prince, looking at Vronsky, and guessing that it had been his
suggestion. “There’s some sense in that, anyway.”

Vronsky looked wonderingly at the prince with his resolute eyes, and,
with a faint smile, began immediately talking to Countess Nordston of
the great ball that was to come off next week.

“I hope you will be there?” he said to Kitty. As soon as the old prince
turned away from him, Levin went out unnoticed, and the last impression
he carried away with him of that evening was the smiling, happy face of
Kitty answering Vronsky’s inquiry about the ball.


Chapter 15

At the end of the evening Kitty told her mother of her conversation
with Levin, and in spite of all the pity she felt for Levin, she was
glad at the thought that she had received an _offer_. She had no doubt
that she had acted rightly. But after she had gone to bed, for a long
while she could not sleep. One impression pursued her relentlessly. It
was Levin’s face, with his scowling brows, and his kind eyes looking
out in dark dejection below them, as he stood listening to her father,
and glancing at her and at Vronsky. And she felt so sorry for him that
tears came into her eyes. But immediately she thought of the man for
whom she had given him up. She vividly recalled his manly, resolute
face, his noble self-possession, and the good nature conspicuous in
everything towards everyone. She remembered the love for her of the man
she loved, and once more all was gladness in her soul, and she lay on
the pillow, smiling with happiness. “I’m sorry, I’m sorry; but what
could I do? It’s not my fault,” she said to herself; but an inner voice
told her something else. Whether she felt remorse at having won Levin’s
love, or at having refused him, she did not know. But her happiness was
poisoned by doubts. “Lord, have pity on us; Lord, have pity on us;
Lord, have pity on us!” she repeated to herself, till she fell asleep.

Meanwhile there took place below, in the prince’s little library, one
of the scenes so often repeated between the parents on account of their
favorite daughter.

“What? I’ll tell you what!” shouted the prince, waving his arms, and at
once wrapping his squirrel-lined dressing-gown round him again. “That
you’ve no pride, no dignity; that you’re disgracing, ruining your
daughter by this vulgar, stupid matchmaking!”

“But, really, for mercy’s sake, prince, what have I done?” said the
princess, almost crying.

She, pleased and happy after her conversation with her daughter, had
gone to the prince to say good-night as usual, and though she had no
intention of telling him of Levin’s offer and Kitty’s refusal, still
she hinted to her husband that she fancied things were practically
settled with Vronsky, and that he would declare himself so soon as his
mother arrived. And thereupon, at those words, the prince had all at
once flown into a passion, and began to use unseemly language.

“What have you done? I’ll tell you what. First of all, you’re trying to
catch an eligible gentleman, and all Moscow will be talking of it, and
with good reason. If you have evening parties, invite everyone, don’t
pick out the possible suitors. Invite all the young bucks. Engage a
piano player, and let them dance, and not as you do things nowadays,
hunting up good matches. It makes me sick, sick to see it, and you’ve
gone on till you’ve turned the poor wench’s head. Levin’s a thousand
times the better man. As for this little Petersburg swell, they’re
turned out by machinery, all on one pattern, and all precious rubbish.
But if he were a prince of the blood, my daughter need not run after
anyone.”

“But what have I done?”

“Why, you’ve....” The prince was crying wrathfully.

“I know if one were to listen to you,” interrupted the princess, “we
should never marry our daughter. If it’s to be so, we’d better go into
the country.”

“Well, and we had better.”

“But do wait a minute. Do I try and catch them? I don’t try to catch
them in the least. A young man, and a very nice one, has fallen in love
with her, and she, I fancy....”

“Oh, yes, you fancy! And how if she really is in love, and he’s no more
thinking of marriage than I am!... Oh, that I should live to see it!
Ah! spiritualism! Ah! Nice! Ah! the ball!” And the prince, imagining
that he was mimicking his wife, made a mincing curtsey at each word.
“And this is how we’re preparing wretchedness for Kitty; and she’s
really got the notion into her head....”

“But what makes you suppose so?”

“I don’t suppose; I know. We have eyes for such things, though
women-folk haven’t. I see a man who has serious intentions, that’s
Levin: and I see a peacock, like this feather-head, who’s only amusing
himself.”

“Oh, well, when once you get an idea into your head!...”

“Well, you’ll remember my words, but too late, just as with Dolly.”

“Well, well, we won’t talk of it,” the princess stopped him,
recollecting her unlucky Dolly.

“By all means, and good-night!”

And signing each other with the cross, the husband and wife parted with
a kiss, feeling that they each remained of their own opinion.

The princess had at first been quite certain that that evening had
settled Kitty’s future, and that there could be no doubt of Vronsky’s
intentions, but her husband’s words had disturbed her. And returning to
her own room, in terror before the unknown future, she, too, like
Kitty, repeated several times in her heart, “Lord, have pity; Lord,
have pity; Lord, have pity.”


Chapter 16

Vronsky had never had a real home life. His mother had been in her
youth a brilliant society woman, who had had during her married life,
and still more afterwards, many love affairs notorious in the whole
fashionable world. His father he scarcely remembered, and he had been
educated in the Corps of Pages.

Leaving the school very young as a brilliant officer, he had at once
got into the circle of wealthy Petersburg army men. Although he did go
more or less into Petersburg society, his love affairs had always
hitherto been outside it.

In Moscow he had for the first time felt, after his luxurious and
coarse life at Petersburg, all the charm of intimacy with a sweet and
innocent girl of his own rank, who cared for him. It never even entered
his head that there could be any harm in his relations with Kitty. At
balls he danced principally with her. He was a constant visitor at
their house. He talked to her as people commonly do talk in society—all
sorts of nonsense, but nonsense to which he could not help attaching a
special meaning in her case. Although he said nothing to her that he
could not have said before everybody, he felt that she was becoming
more and more dependent upon him, and the more he felt this, the better
he liked it, and the tenderer was his feeling for her. He did not know
that his mode of behavior in relation to Kitty had a definite
character, that it is courting young girls with no intention of
marriage, and that such courting is one of the evil actions common
among brilliant young men such as he was. It seemed to him that he was
the first who had discovered this pleasure, and he was enjoying his
discovery.

If he could have heard what her parents were saying that evening, if he
could have put himself at the point of view of the family and have
heard that Kitty would be unhappy if he did not marry her, he would
have been greatly astonished, and would not have believed it. He could
not believe that what gave such great and delicate pleasure to him, and
above all to her, could be wrong. Still less could he have believed
that he ought to marry.

Marriage had never presented itself to him as a possibility. He not
only disliked family life, but a family, and especially a husband was,
in accordance with the views general in the bachelor world in which he
lived, conceived as something alien, repellant, and, above all,
ridiculous.

But though Vronsky had not the least suspicion what the parents were
saying, he felt on coming away from the Shtcherbatskys’ that the secret
spiritual bond which existed between him and Kitty had grown so much
stronger that evening that some step must be taken. But what step could
and ought to be taken he could not imagine.

“What is so exquisite,” he thought, as he returned from the
Shtcherbatskys’, carrying away with him, as he always did, a delicious
feeling of purity and freshness, arising partly from the fact that he
had not been smoking for a whole evening, and with it a new feeling of
tenderness at her love for him—“what is so exquisite is that not a word
has been said by me or by her, but we understand each other so well in
this unseen language of looks and tones, that this evening more clearly
than ever she told me she loves me. And how secretly, simply, and most
of all, how trustfully! I feel myself better, purer. I feel that I have
a heart, and that there is a great deal of good in me. Those sweet,
loving eyes! When she said: ‘Indeed I do....’

“Well, what then? Oh, nothing. It’s good for me, and good for her.” And
he began wondering where to finish the evening.

He passed in review of the places he might go to. “Club? a game of
bezique, champagne with Ignatov? No, I’m not going. _Château des
Fleurs_; there I shall find Oblonsky, songs, the cancan. No, I’m sick
of it. That’s why I like the Shtcherbatskys’, that I’m growing better.
I’ll go home.” He went straight to his room at Dussots’ Hotel, ordered
supper, and then undressed, and as soon as his head touched the pillow,
fell into a sound sleep.


Chapter 17

Next day at eleven o’clock in the morning Vronsky drove to the station
of the Petersburg railway to meet his mother, and the first person he
came across on the great flight of steps was Oblonsky, who was
expecting his sister by the same train.

“Ah! your excellency!” cried Oblonsky, “whom are you meeting?”

“My mother,” Vronsky responded, smiling, as everyone did who met
Oblonsky. He shook hands with him, and together they ascended the
steps. “She is to be here from Petersburg today.”

“I was looking out for you till two o’clock last night. Where did you
go after the Shtcherbatskys’?”

“Home,” answered Vronsky. “I must own I felt so well content yesterday
after the Shtcherbatskys’ that I didn’t care to go anywhere.”

“I know a gallant steed by tokens sure,

And by his eyes I know a youth in love,”



declaimed Stepan Arkadyevitch, just as he had done before to Levin.

Vronsky smiled with a look that seemed to say that he did not deny it,
but he promptly changed the subject.

“And whom are you meeting?” he asked.

“I? I’ve come to meet a pretty woman,” said Oblonsky.

“You don’t say so!”

“_Honi soit qui mal y pense!_ My sister Anna.”

“Ah! that’s Madame Karenina,” said Vronsky.

“You know her, no doubt?”

“I think I do. Or perhaps not ... I really am not sure,” Vronsky
answered heedlessly, with a vague recollection of something stiff and
tedious evoked by the name Karenina.

“But Alexey Alexandrovitch, my celebrated brother-in-law, you surely
must know. All the world knows him.”

“I know him by reputation and by sight. I know that he’s clever,
learned, religious somewhat.... But you know that’s not ... _not in my
line,_” said Vronsky in English.

“Yes, he’s a very remarkable man; rather a conservative, but a splendid
man,” observed Stepan Arkadyevitch, “a splendid man.”

“Oh, well, so much the better for him,” said Vronsky smiling. “Oh,
you’ve come,” he said, addressing a tall old footman of his mother’s,
standing at the door; “come here.”

Besides the charm Oblonsky had in general for everyone, Vronsky had
felt of late specially drawn to him by the fact that in his imagination
he was associated with Kitty.

“Well, what do you say? Shall we give a supper on Sunday for the
_diva?_” he said to him with a smile, taking his arm.

“Of course. I’m collecting subscriptions. Oh, did you make the
acquaintance of my friend Levin?” asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“Yes; but he left rather early.”

“He’s a capital fellow,” pursued Oblonsky. “Isn’t he?”

“I don’t know why it is,” responded Vronsky, “in all Moscow
people—present company of course excepted,” he put in jestingly,
“there’s something uncompromising. They are all on the defensive, lose
their tempers, as though they all want to make one feel something....”

“Yes, that’s true, it is so,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing
good-humoredly.

“Will the train soon be in?” Vronsky asked a railway official.

“The train’s signaled,” answered the man.

The approach of the train was more and more evident by the preparatory
bustle in the station, the rush of porters, the movement of policemen
and attendants, and people meeting the train. Through the frosty vapor
could be seen workmen in short sheepskins and soft felt boots crossing
the rails of the curving line. The hiss of the boiler could be heard on
the distant rails, and the rumble of something heavy.

“No,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who felt a great inclination to tell
Vronsky of Levin’s intentions in regard to Kitty. “No, you’ve not got a
true impression of Levin. He’s a very nervous man, and is sometimes out
of humor, it’s true, but then he is often very nice. He’s such a true,
honest nature, and a heart of gold. But yesterday there were special
reasons,” pursued Stepan Arkadyevitch, with a meaning smile, totally
oblivious of the genuine sympathy he had felt the day before for his
friend, and feeling the same sympathy now, only for Vronsky. “Yes,
there were reasons why he could not help being either particularly
happy or particularly unhappy.”

Vronsky stood still and asked directly: “How so? Do you mean he made
your _belle-sœur_ an offer yesterday?”

“Maybe,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “I fancied something of the sort
yesterday. Yes, if he went away early, and was out of humor too, it
must mean it.... He’s been so long in love, and I’m very sorry for
him.”

“So that’s it! I should imagine, though, she might reckon on a better
match,” said Vronsky, drawing himself up and walking about again,
“though I don’t know him, of course,” he added. “Yes, that is a hateful
position! That’s why most fellows prefer to have to do with Klaras. If
you don’t succeed with them it only proves that you’ve not enough cash,
but in this case one’s dignity’s at stake. But here’s the train.”

The engine had already whistled in the distance. A few instants later
the platform was quivering, and with puffs of steam hanging low in the
air from the frost, the engine rolled up, with the lever of the middle
wheel rhythmically moving up and down, and the stooping figure of the
engine-driver covered with frost. Behind the tender, setting the
platform more and more slowly swaying, came the luggage van with a dog
whining in it. At last the passenger carriages rolled in, oscillating
before coming to a standstill.

A smart guard jumped out, giving a whistle, and after him one by one
the impatient passengers began to get down: an officer of the guards,
holding himself erect, and looking severely about him; a nimble little
merchant with a satchel, smiling gaily; a peasant with a sack over his
shoulder.

Vronsky, standing beside Oblonsky, watched the carriages and the
passengers, totally oblivious of his mother. What he had just heard
about Kitty excited and delighted him. Unconsciously he arched his
chest, and his eyes flashed. He felt himself a conqueror.

“Countess Vronskaya is in that compartment,” said the smart guard,
going up to Vronsky.

The guard’s words roused him, and forced him to think of his mother and
his approaching meeting with her. He did not in his heart respect his
mother, and without acknowledging it to himself, he did not love her,
though in accordance with the ideas of the set in which he lived, and
with his own education, he could not have conceived of any behavior to
his mother not in the highest degree respectful and obedient, and the
more externally obedient and respectful his behavior, the less in his
heart he respected and loved her.


Chapter 18

Vronsky followed the guard to the carriage, and at the door of the
compartment he stopped short to make room for a lady who was getting
out.

With the insight of a man of the world, from one glance at this lady’s
appearance Vronsky classified her as belonging to the best society. He
begged pardon, and was getting into the carriage, but felt he must
glance at her once more; not that she was very beautiful, not on
account of the elegance and modest grace which were apparent in her
whole figure, but because in the expression of her charming face, as
she passed close by him, there was something peculiarly caressing and
soft. As he looked round, she too turned her head. Her shining gray
eyes, that looked dark from the thick lashes, rested with friendly
attention on his face, as though she were recognizing him, and then
promptly turned away to the passing crowd, as though seeking someone.
In that brief look Vronsky had time to notice the suppressed eagerness
which played over her face, and flitted between the brilliant eyes and
the faint smile that curved her red lips. It was as though her nature
were so brimming over with something that against her will it showed
itself now in the flash of her eyes, and now in her smile. Deliberately
she shrouded the light in her eyes, but it shone against her will in
the faintly perceptible smile.

Vronsky stepped into the carriage. His mother, a dried-up old lady with
black eyes and ringlets, screwed up her eyes, scanning her son, and
smiled slightly with her thin lips. Getting up from the seat and
handing her maid a bag, she gave her little wrinkled hand to her son to
kiss, and lifting his head from her hand, kissed him on the cheek.

“You got my telegram? Quite well? Thank God.”

“You had a good journey?” said her son, sitting down beside her, and
involuntarily listening to a woman’s voice outside the door. He knew it
was the voice of the lady he had met at the door.

“All the same I don’t agree with you,” said the lady’s voice.

“It’s the Petersburg view, madame.”

“Not Petersburg, but simply feminine,” she responded.

“Well, well, allow me to kiss your hand.”

“Good-bye, Ivan Petrovitch. And could you see if my brother is here,
and send him to me?” said the lady in the doorway, and stepped back
again into the compartment.

“Well, have you found your brother?” said Countess Vronskaya,
addressing the lady.

Vronsky understood now that this was Madame Karenina.

“Your brother is here,” he said, standing up. “Excuse me, I did not
know you, and, indeed, our acquaintance was so slight,” said Vronsky,
bowing, “that no doubt you do not remember me.”

“Oh, no,” said she, “I should have known you because your mother and I
have been talking, I think, of nothing but you all the way.” As she
spoke she let the eagerness that would insist on coming out show itself
in her smile. “And still no sign of my brother.”

“Do call him, Alexey,” said the old countess. Vronsky stepped out onto
the platform and shouted:

“Oblonsky! Here!”

Madame Karenina, however, did not wait for her brother, but catching
sight of him she stepped out with her light, resolute step. And as soon
as her brother had reached her, with a gesture that struck Vronsky by
its decision and its grace, she flung her left arm around his neck,
drew him rapidly to her, and kissed him warmly. Vronsky gazed, never
taking his eyes from her, and smiled, he could not have said why. But
recollecting that his mother was waiting for him, he went back again
into the carriage.

“She’s very sweet, isn’t she?” said the countess of Madame Karenina.
“Her husband put her with me, and I was delighted to have her. We’ve
been talking all the way. And so you, I hear ... _vous filez le parfait
amour. Tant mieux, mon cher, tant mieux._”

“I don’t know what you are referring to, maman,” he answered coldly.
“Come, maman, let us go.”

Madame Karenina entered the carriage again to say good-bye to the
countess.

“Well, countess, you have met your son, and I my brother,” she said.
“And all my gossip is exhausted. I should have nothing more to tell
you.”

“Oh, no,” said the countess, taking her hand. “I could go all around
the world with you and never be dull. You are one of those delightful
women in whose company it’s sweet to be silent as well as to talk. Now
please don’t fret over your son; you can’t expect never to be parted.”

Madame Karenina stood quite still, holding herself very erect, and her
eyes were smiling.

“Anna Arkadyevna,” the countess said in explanation to her son, “has a
little son eight years old, I believe, and she has never been parted
from him before, and she keeps fretting over leaving him.”

“Yes, the countess and I have been talking all the time, I of my son
and she of hers,” said Madame Karenina, and again a smile lighted up
her face, a caressing smile intended for him.

“I am afraid that you must have been dreadfully bored,” he said,
promptly catching the ball of coquetry she had flung him. But
apparently she did not care to pursue the conversation in that strain,
and she turned to the old countess.

“Thank you so much. The time has passed so quickly. Good-bye,
countess.”

“Good-bye, my love,” answered the countess. “Let me have a kiss of your
pretty face. I speak plainly, at my age, and I tell you simply that
I’ve lost my heart to you.”

Stereotyped as the phrase was, Madame Karenina obviously believed it
and was delighted by it. She flushed, bent down slightly, and put her
cheek to the countess’s lips, drew herself up again, and with the same
smile fluttering between her lips and her eyes, she gave her hand to
Vronsky. He pressed the little hand she gave him, and was delighted, as
though at something special, by the energetic squeeze with which she
freely and vigorously shook his hand. She went out with the rapid step
which bore her rather fully-developed figure with such strange
lightness.

“Very charming,” said the countess.

That was just what her son was thinking. His eyes followed her till her
graceful figure was out of sight, and then the smile remained on his
face. He saw out of the window how she went up to her brother, put her
arm in his, and began telling him something eagerly, obviously
something that had nothing to do with him, Vronsky, and at that he felt
annoyed.

“Well, maman, are you perfectly well?” he repeated, turning to his
mother.

“Everything has been delightful. Alexander has been very good, and
Marie has grown very pretty. She’s very interesting.”

And she began telling him again of what interested her most—the
christening of her grandson, for which she had been staying in
Petersburg, and the special favor shown her elder son by the Tsar.

“Here’s Lavrenty,” said Vronsky, looking out of the window; “now we can
go, if you like.”

The old butler, who had traveled with the countess, came to the
carriage to announce that everything was ready, and the countess got up
to go.

“Come; there’s not such a crowd now,” said Vronsky.

The maid took a handbag and the lap dog, the butler and a porter the
other baggage. Vronsky gave his mother his arm; but just as they were
getting out of the carriage several men ran suddenly by with
panic-stricken faces. The station-master, too, ran by in his
extraordinary colored cap. Obviously something unusual had happened.
The crowd who had left the train were running back again.

“What?... What?... Where?... Flung himself!... Crushed!...” was heard
among the crowd. Stepan Arkadyevitch, with his sister on his arm,
turned back. They too looked scared, and stopped at the carriage door
to avoid the crowd.

The ladies got in, while Vronsky and Stepan Arkadyevitch followed the
crowd to find out details of the disaster.

A guard, either drunk or too much muffled up in the bitter frost, had
not heard the train moving back, and had been crushed.

Before Vronsky and Oblonsky came back the ladies heard the facts from
the butler.

Oblonsky and Vronsky had both seen the mutilated corpse. Oblonsky was
evidently upset. He frowned and seemed ready to cry.

“Ah, how awful! Ah, Anna, if you had seen it! Ah, how awful!” he said.

Vronsky did not speak; his handsome face was serious, but perfectly
composed.

“Oh, if you had seen it, countess,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “And his
wife was there.... It was awful to see her!... She flung herself on the
body. They say he was the only support of an immense family. How
awful!”

“Couldn’t one do anything for her?” said Madame Karenina in an agitated
whisper.

Vronsky glanced at her, and immediately got out of the carriage.

“I’ll be back directly, maman,” he remarked, turning round in the
doorway.

When he came back a few minutes later, Stepan Arkadyevitch was already
in conversation with the countess about the new singer, while the
countess was impatiently looking towards the door, waiting for her son.

“Now let us be off,” said Vronsky, coming in. They went out together.
Vronsky was in front with his mother. Behind walked Madame Karenina
with her brother. Just as they were going out of the station the
station-master overtook Vronsky.

“You gave my assistant two hundred roubles. Would you kindly explain
for whose benefit you intend them?”

“For the widow,” said Vronsky, shrugging his shoulders. “I should have
thought there was no need to ask.”

“You gave that?” cried Oblonsky, behind, and, pressing his sister’s
hand, he added: “Very nice, very nice! Isn’t he a splendid fellow?
Good-bye, countess.”

And he and his sister stood still, looking for her maid.

When they went out the Vronsky’s carriage had already driven away.
People coming in were still talking of what happened.

“What a horrible death!” said a gentleman, passing by. “They say he was
cut in two pieces.”

“On the contrary, I think it’s the easiest—instantaneous,” observed
another.

“How is it they don’t take proper precautions?” said a third.

Madame Karenina seated herself in the carriage, and Stepan Arkadyevitch
saw with surprise that her lips were quivering, and she was with
difficulty restraining her tears.

“What is it, Anna?” he asked, when they had driven a few hundred yards.

“It’s an omen of evil,” she said.

“What nonsense!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “You’ve come, that’s the
chief thing. You can’t conceive how I’m resting my hopes on you.”

“Have you known Vronsky long?” she asked.

“Yes. You know we’re hoping he will marry Kitty.”

“Yes?” said Anna softly. “Come now, let us talk of you,” she added,
tossing her head, as though she would physically shake off something
superfluous oppressing her. “Let us talk of your affairs. I got your
letter, and here I am.”

“Yes, all my hopes are in you,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“Well, tell me all about it.”

And Stepan Arkadyevitch began to tell his story.

On reaching home Oblonsky helped his sister out, sighed, pressed her
hand, and set off to his office.


Chapter 19

When Anna went into the room, Dolly was sitting in the little
drawing-room with a white-headed fat little boy, already like his
father, giving him a lesson in French reading. As the boy read, he kept
twisting and trying to tear off a button that was nearly off his
jacket. His mother had several times taken his hand from it, but the
fat little hand went back to the button again. His mother pulled the
button off and put it in her pocket.

“Keep your hands still, Grisha,” she said, and she took up her work, a
coverlet she had long been making. She always set to work on it at
depressed moments, and now she knitted at it nervously, twitching her
fingers and counting the stitches. Though she had sent word the day
before to her husband that it was nothing to her whether his sister
came or not, she had made everything ready for her arrival, and was
expecting her sister-in-law with emotion.

Dolly was crushed by her sorrow, utterly swallowed up by it. Still she
did not forget that Anna, her sister-in-law, was the wife of one of the
most important personages in Petersburg, and was a Petersburg _grande
dame_. And, thanks to this circumstance, she did not carry out her
threat to her husband—that is to say, she remembered that her
sister-in-law was coming. “And, after all, Anna is in no wise to
blame,” thought Dolly. “I know nothing of her except the very best, and
I have seen nothing but kindness and affection from her towards
myself.” It was true that as far as she could recall her impressions at
Petersburg at the Karenins’, she did not like their household itself;
there was something artificial in the whole framework of their family
life. “But why should I not receive her? If only she doesn’t take it
into her head to console me!” thought Dolly. “All consolation and
counsel and Christian forgiveness, all that I have thought over a
thousand times, and it’s all no use.”

All these days Dolly had been alone with her children. She did not want
to talk of her sorrow, but with that sorrow in her heart she could not
talk of outside matters. She knew that in one way or another she would
tell Anna everything, and she was alternately glad at the thought of
speaking freely, and angry at the necessity of speaking of her
humiliation with her, his sister, and of hearing her ready-made phrases
of good advice and comfort. She had been on the lookout for her,
glancing at her watch every minute, and, as so often happens, let slip
just that minute when her visitor arrived, so that she did not hear the
bell.

Catching a sound of skirts and light steps at the door, she looked
round, and her care-worn face unconsciously expressed not gladness, but
wonder. She got up and embraced her sister-in-law.

“What, here already!” she said as she kissed her.

“Dolly, how glad I am to see you!”

“I am glad, too,” said Dolly, faintly smiling, and trying by the
expression of Anna’s face to find out whether she knew. “Most likely
she knows,” she thought, noticing the sympathy in Anna’s face. “Well,
come along, I’ll take you to your room,” she went on, trying to defer
as long as possible the moment of confidences.

“Is this Grisha? Heavens, how he’s grown!” said Anna; and kissing him,
never taking her eyes off Dolly, she stood still and flushed a little.
“No, please, let us stay here.”

She took off her kerchief and her hat, and catching it in a lock of her
black hair, which was a mass of curls, she tossed her head and shook
her hair down.

“You are radiant with health and happiness!” said Dolly, almost with
envy.

“I?... Yes,” said Anna. “Merciful heavens, Tanya! You’re the same age
as my Seryozha,” she added, addressing the little girl as she ran in.
She took her in her arms and kissed her. “Delightful child, delightful!
Show me them all.”

She mentioned them, not only remembering the names, but the years,
months, characters, illnesses of all the children, and Dolly could not
but appreciate that.

“Very well, we will go to them,” she said. “It’s a pity Vassya’s
asleep.”

After seeing the children, they sat down, alone now, in the
drawing-room, to coffee. Anna took the tray, and then pushed it away
from her.

“Dolly,” she said, “he has told me.”

Dolly looked coldly at Anna; she was waiting now for phrases of
conventional sympathy, but Anna said nothing of the sort.

“Dolly, dear,” she said, “I don’t want to speak for him to you, nor to
try to comfort you; that’s impossible. But, darling, I’m simply sorry,
sorry from my heart for you!”

Under the thick lashes of her shining eyes tears suddenly glittered.
She moved nearer to her sister-in-law and took her hand in her vigorous
little hand. Dolly did not shrink away, but her face did not lose its
frigid expression. She said:

“To comfort me’s impossible. Everything’s lost after what has happened,
everything’s over!”

And directly she had said this, her face suddenly softened. Anna lifted
the wasted, thin hand of Dolly, kissed it and said:

“But, Dolly, what’s to be done, what’s to be done? How is it best to
act in this awful position—that’s what you must think of.”

“All’s over, and there’s nothing more,” said Dolly. “And the worst of
all is, you see, that I can’t cast him off: there are the children, I
am tied. And I can’t live with him! it’s a torture to me to see him.”

“Dolly, darling, he has spoken to me, but I want to hear it from you:
tell me about it.”

Dolly looked at her inquiringly.

Sympathy and love unfeigned were visible on Anna’s face.

“Very well,” she said all at once. “But I will tell you it from the
beginning. You know how I was married. With the education mamma gave us
I was more than innocent, I was stupid. I knew nothing. I know they say
men tell their wives of their former lives, but Stiva”—she corrected
herself—“Stepan Arkadyevitch told me nothing. You’ll hardly believe it,
but till now I imagined that I was the only woman he had known. So I
lived eight years. You must understand that I was so far from
suspecting infidelity, I regarded it as impossible, and then—try to
imagine it—with such ideas, to find out suddenly all the horror, all
the loathsomeness.... You must try and understand me. To be fully
convinced of one’s happiness, and all at once....” continued Dolly,
holding back her sobs, “to get a letter ... his letter to his mistress,
my governess. No, it’s too awful!” She hastily pulled out her
handkerchief and hid her face in it. “I can understand being carried
away by feeling,” she went on after a brief silence, “but deliberately,
slyly deceiving me ... and with whom?... To go on being my husband
together with her ... it’s awful! You can’t understand....”

“Oh, yes, I understand! I understand! Dolly, dearest, I do understand,”
said Anna, pressing her hand.

“And do you imagine he realizes all the awfulness of my position?”
Dolly resumed. “Not the slightest! He’s happy and contented.”

“Oh, no!” Anna interposed quickly. “He’s to be pitied, he’s weighed
down by remorse....”

“Is he capable of remorse?” Dolly interrupted, gazing intently into her
sister-in-law’s face.

“Yes. I know him. I could not look at him without feeling sorry for
him. We both know him. He’s good-hearted, but he’s proud, and now he’s
so humiliated. What touched me most....” (and here Anna guessed what
would touch Dolly most) “he’s tortured by two things: that he’s ashamed
for the children’s sake, and that, loving you—yes, yes, loving you
beyond everything on earth,” she hurriedly interrupted Dolly, who would
have answered—“he has hurt you, pierced you to the heart. ‘No, no, she
cannot forgive me,’ he keeps saying.”

Dolly looked dreamily away beyond her sister-in-law as she listened to
her words.

“Yes, I can see that his position is awful; it’s worse for the guilty
than the innocent,” she said, “if he feels that all the misery comes
from his fault. But how am I to forgive him, how am I to be his wife
again after her? For me to live with him now would be torture, just
because I love my past love for him....”

And sobs cut short her words. But as though of set design, each time
she was softened she began to speak again of what exasperated her.

“She’s young, you see, she’s pretty,” she went on. “Do you know, Anna,
my youth and my beauty are gone, taken by whom? By him and his
children. I have worked for him, and all I had has gone in his service,
and now of course any fresh, vulgar creature has more charm for him. No
doubt they talked of me together, or, worse still, they were silent. Do
you understand?”

Again her eyes glowed with hatred.

“And after that he will tell me.... What! can I believe him? Never! No,
everything is over, everything that once made my comfort, the reward of
my work, and my sufferings.... Would you believe it, I was teaching
Grisha just now: once this was a joy to me, now it is a torture. What
have I to strive and toil for? Why are the children here? What’s so
awful is that all at once my heart’s turned, and instead of love and
tenderness, I have nothing but hatred for him; yes, hatred. I could
kill him.”

“Darling Dolly, I understand, but don’t torture yourself. You are so
distressed, so overwrought, that you look at many things mistakenly.”

Dolly grew calmer, and for two minutes both were silent.

“What’s to be done? Think for me, Anna, help me. I have thought over
everything, and I see nothing.”

Anna could think of nothing, but her heart responded instantly to each
word, to each change of expression of her sister-in-law.

“One thing I would say,” began Anna. “I am his sister, I know his
character, that faculty of forgetting everything, everything” (she
waved her hand before her forehead), “that faculty for being completely
carried away, but for completely repenting too. He cannot believe it,
he cannot comprehend now how he can have acted as he did.”

“No; he understands, he understood!” Dolly broke in. “But I ... you are
forgetting me ... does it make it easier for me?”

“Wait a minute. When he told me, I will own I did not realize all the
awfulness of your position. I saw nothing but him, and that the family
was broken up. I felt sorry for him, but after talking to you, I see
it, as a woman, quite differently. I see your agony, and I can’t tell
you how sorry I am for you! But, Dolly, darling, I fully realize your
sufferings, only there is one thing I don’t know; I don’t know ... I
don’t know how much love there is still in your heart for him. That you
know—whether there is enough for you to be able to forgive him. If
there is, forgive him!”

“No,” Dolly was beginning, but Anna cut her short, kissing her hand
once more.

“I know more of the world than you do,” she said. “I know how men like
Stiva look at it. You speak of his talking of you with her. That never
happened. Such men are unfaithful, but their home and wife are sacred
to them. Somehow or other these women are still looked on with contempt
by them, and do not touch on their feeling for their family. They draw
a sort of line that can’t be crossed between them and their families. I
don’t understand it, but it is so.”

“Yes, but he has kissed her....”

“Dolly, hush, darling. I saw Stiva when he was in love with you. I
remember the time when he came to me and cried, talking of you, and all
the poetry and loftiness of his feeling for you, and I know that the
longer he has lived with you the loftier you have been in his eyes. You
know we have sometimes laughed at him for putting in at every word:
‘Dolly’s a marvelous woman.’ You have always been a divinity for him,
and you are that still, and this has not been an infidelity of the
heart....”

“But if it is repeated?”

“It cannot be, as I understand it....”

“Yes, but could you forgive it?”

“I don’t know, I can’t judge.... Yes, I can,” said Anna, thinking a
moment; and grasping the position in her thought and weighing it in her
inner balance, she added: “Yes, I can, I can, I can. Yes, I could
forgive it. I could not be the same, no; but I could forgive it, and
forgive it as though it had never been, never been at all....”

“Oh, of course,” Dolly interposed quickly, as though saying what she
had more than once thought, “else it would not be forgiveness. If one
forgives, it must be completely, completely. Come, let us go; I’ll take
you to your room,” she said, getting up, and on the way she embraced
Anna. “My dear, how glad I am you came. It has made things better, ever
so much better.”


Chapter 20

The whole of that day Anna spent at home, that’s to say at the
Oblonskys’, and received no one, though some of her acquaintances had
already heard of her arrival, and came to call the same day. Anna spent
the whole morning with Dolly and the children. She merely sent a brief
note to her brother to tell him that he must not fail to dine at home.
“Come, God is merciful,” she wrote.

Oblonsky did dine at home: the conversation was general, and his wife,
speaking to him, addressed him as “Stiva,” as she had not done before.
In the relations of the husband and wife the same estrangement still
remained, but there was no talk now of separation, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch saw the possibility of explanation and reconciliation.

Immediately after dinner Kitty came in. She knew Anna Arkadyevna, but
only very slightly, and she came now to her sister’s with some
trepidation, at the prospect of meeting this fashionable Petersburg
lady, whom everyone spoke so highly of. But she made a favorable
impression on Anna Arkadyevna—she saw that at once. Anna was
unmistakably admiring her loveliness and her youth: before Kitty knew
where she was she found herself not merely under Anna’s sway, but in
love with her, as young girls do fall in love with older and married
women. Anna was not like a fashionable lady, nor the mother of a boy of
eight years old. In the elasticity of her movements, the freshness and
the unflagging eagerness which persisted in her face, and broke out in
her smile and her glance, she would rather have passed for a girl of
twenty, had it not been for a serious and at times mournful look in her
eyes, which struck and attracted Kitty. Kitty felt that Anna was
perfectly simple and was concealing nothing, but that she had another
higher world of interests inaccessible to her, complex and poetic.

After dinner, when Dolly went away to her own room, Anna rose quickly
and went up to her brother, who was just lighting a cigar.

“Stiva,” she said to him, winking gaily, crossing him and glancing
towards the door, “go, and God help you.”

He threw down the cigar, understanding her, and departed through the
doorway.

When Stepan Arkadyevitch had disappeared, she went back to the sofa
where she had been sitting, surrounded by the children. Either because
the children saw that their mother was fond of this aunt, or that they
felt a special charm in her themselves, the two elder ones, and the
younger following their lead, as children so often do, had clung about
their new aunt since before dinner, and would not leave her side. And
it had become a sort of game among them to sit as close as possible to
their aunt, to touch her, hold her little hand, kiss it, play with her
ring, or even touch the flounce of her skirt.

“Come, come, as we were sitting before,” said Anna Arkadyevna, sitting
down in her place.

And again Grisha poked his little face under her arm, and nestled with
his head on her gown, beaming with pride and happiness.

“And when is your next ball?” she asked Kitty.

“Next week, and a splendid ball. One of those balls where one always
enjoys oneself.”

“Why, are there balls where one always enjoys oneself?” Anna said, with
tender irony.

“It’s strange, but there are. At the Bobrishtchevs’ one always enjoys
oneself, and at the Nikitins’ too, while at the Mezhkovs’ it’s always
dull. Haven’t you noticed it?”

“No, my dear, for me there are no balls now where one enjoys oneself,”
said Anna, and Kitty detected in her eyes that mysterious world which
was not open to her. “For me there are some less dull and tiresome.”

“How can _you_ be dull at a ball?”

“Why should not _I_ be dull at a ball?” inquired Anna.

Kitty perceived that Anna knew what answer would follow.

“Because you always look nicer than anyone.”

Anna had the faculty of blushing. She blushed a little, and said:

“In the first place it’s never so; and secondly, if it were, what
difference would it make to me?”

“Are you coming to this ball?” asked Kitty.

“I imagine it won’t be possible to avoid going. Here, take it,” she
said to Tanya, who was pulling the loosely-fitting ring off her white,
slender-tipped finger.

“I shall be so glad if you go. I should so like to see you at a ball.”

“Anyway, if I do go, I shall comfort myself with the thought that it’s
a pleasure to you ... Grisha, don’t pull my hair. It’s untidy enough
without that,” she said, putting up a straying lock, which Grisha had
been playing with.

“I imagine you at the ball in lilac.”

“And why in lilac precisely?” asked Anna, smiling. “Now, children, run
along, run along. Do you hear? Miss Hoole is calling you to tea,” she
said, tearing the children from her, and sending them off to the
dining-room.

“I know why you press me to come to the ball. You expect a great deal
of this ball, and you want everyone to be there to take part in it.”

“How do you know? Yes.”

“Oh! what a happy time you are at,” pursued Anna. “I remember, and I
know that blue haze like the mist on the mountains in Switzerland. That
mist which covers everything in that blissful time when childhood is
just ending, and out of that vast circle, happy and gay, there is a
path growing narrower and narrower, and it is delightful and alarming
to enter the ballroom, bright and splendid as it is.... Who has not
been through it?”

Kitty smiled without speaking. “But how did she go through it? How I
should like to know all her love story!” thought Kitty, recalling the
unromantic appearance of Alexey Alexandrovitch, her husband.

“I know something. Stiva told me, and I congratulate you. I liked him
so much,” Anna continued. “I met Vronsky at the railway station.”

“Oh, was he there?” asked Kitty, blushing. “What was it Stiva told
you?”

“Stiva gossiped about it all. And I should be so glad ... I traveled
yesterday with Vronsky’s mother,” she went on; “and his mother talked
without a pause of him, he’s her favorite. I know mothers are partial,
but....”

“What did his mother tell you?”

“Oh, a great deal! And I know that he’s her favorite; still one can see
how chivalrous he is.... Well, for instance, she told me that he had
wanted to give up all his property to his brother, that he had done
something extraordinary when he was quite a child, saved a woman out of
the water. He’s a hero, in fact,” said Anna, smiling and recollecting
the two hundred roubles he had given at the station.

But she did not tell Kitty about the two hundred roubles. For some
reason it was disagreeable to her to think of it. She felt that there
was something that had to do with her in it, and something that ought
not to have been.

“She pressed me very much to go and see her,” Anna went on; “and I
shall be glad to go to see her tomorrow. Stiva is staying a long while
in Dolly’s room, thank God,” Anna added, changing the subject, and
getting up, Kitty fancied, displeased with something.

“No, I’m first! No, I!” screamed the children, who had finished tea,
running up to their Aunt Anna.

“All together,” said Anna, and she ran laughing to meet them, and
embraced and swung round all the throng of swarming children, shrieking
with delight.


Chapter 21

Dolly came out of her room to the tea of the grown-up people. Stepan
Arkadyevitch did not come out. He must have left his wife’s room by the
other door.

“I am afraid you’ll be cold upstairs,” observed Dolly, addressing Anna;
“I want to move you downstairs, and we shall be nearer.”

“Oh, please, don’t trouble about me,” answered Anna, looking intently
into Dolly’s face, trying to make out whether there had been a
reconciliation or not.

“It will be lighter for you here,” answered her sister-in-law.

“I assure you that I sleep everywhere, and always like a marmot.”

“What’s the question?” inquired Stepan Arkadyevitch, coming out of his
room and addressing his wife.

From his tone both Kitty and Anna knew that a reconciliation had taken
place.

“I want to move Anna downstairs, but we must hang up blinds. No one
knows how to do it; I must see to it myself,” answered Dolly addressing
him.

“God knows whether they are fully reconciled,” thought Anna, hearing
her tone, cold and composed.

“Oh, nonsense, Dolly, always making difficulties,” answered her
husband. “Come, I’ll do it all, if you like....”

“Yes, they must be reconciled,” thought Anna.

“I know how you do everything,” answered Dolly. “You tell Matvey to do
what can’t be done, and go away yourself, leaving him to make a muddle
of everything,” and her habitual, mocking smile curved the corners of
Dolly’s lips as she spoke.

“Full, full reconciliation, full,” thought Anna; “thank God!” and
rejoicing that she was the cause of it, she went up to Dolly and kissed
her.

“Not at all. Why do you always look down on me and Matvey?” said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, smiling hardly perceptibly, and addressing his wife.

The whole evening Dolly was, as always, a little mocking in her tone to
her husband, while Stepan Arkadyevitch was happy and cheerful, but not
so as to seem as though, having been forgiven, he had forgotten his
offense.

At half-past nine o’clock a particularly joyful and pleasant family
conversation over the tea-table at the Oblonskys’ was broken up by an
apparently simple incident. But this simple incident for some reason
struck everyone as strange. Talking about common acquaintances in
Petersburg, Anna got up quickly.

“She is in my album,” she said; “and, by the way, I’ll show you my
Seryozha,” she added, with a mother’s smile of pride.

Towards ten o’clock, when she usually said good-night to her son, and
often before going to a ball put him to bed herself, she felt depressed
at being so far from him; and whatever she was talking about, she kept
coming back in thought to her curly-headed Seryozha. She longed to look
at his photograph and talk of him. Seizing the first pretext, she got
up, and with her light, resolute step went for her album. The stairs up
to her room came out on the landing of the great warm main staircase.

Just as she was leaving the drawing-room, a ring was heard in the hall.

“Who can that be?” said Dolly.

“It’s early for me to be fetched, and for anyone else it’s late,”
observed Kitty.

“Sure to be someone with papers for me,” put in Stepan Arkadyevitch.
When Anna was passing the top of the staircase, a servant was running
up to announce the visitor, while the visitor himself was standing
under a lamp. Anna glancing down at once recognized Vronsky, and a
strange feeling of pleasure and at the same time of dread of something
stirred in her heart. He was standing still, not taking off his coat,
pulling something out of his pocket. At the instant when she was just
facing the stairs, he raised his eyes, caught sight of her, and into
the expression of his face there passed a shade of embarrassment and
dismay. With a slight inclination of her head she passed, hearing
behind her Stepan Arkadyevitch’s loud voice calling him to come up, and
the quiet, soft, and composed voice of Vronsky refusing.

When Anna returned with the album, he was already gone, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch was telling them that he had called to inquire about the
dinner they were giving next day to a celebrity who had just arrived.
“And nothing would induce him to come up. What a queer fellow he is!”
added Stepan Arkadyevitch.

Kitty blushed. She thought that she was the only person who knew why he
had come, and why he would not come up. “He has been at home,” she
thought, “and didn’t find me, and thought I should be here, but he did
not come up because he thought it late, and Anna’s here.”

All of them looked at each other, saying nothing, and began to look at
Anna’s album.

There was nothing either exceptional or strange in a man’s calling at
half-past nine on a friend to inquire details of a proposed dinner
party and not coming in, but it seemed strange to all of them. Above
all, it seemed strange and not right to Anna.


Chapter 22

The ball was only just beginning as Kitty and her mother walked up the
great staircase, flooded with light, and lined with flowers and footmen
in powder and red coats. From the rooms came a constant, steady hum, as
from a hive, and the rustle of movement; and while on the landing
between trees they gave last touches to their hair and dresses before
the mirror, they heard from the ballroom the careful, distinct notes of
the fiddles of the orchestra beginning the first waltz. A little old
man in civilian dress, arranging his gray curls before another mirror,
and diffusing an odor of scent, stumbled against them on the stairs,
and stood aside, evidently admiring Kitty, whom he did not know. A
beardless youth, one of those society youths whom the old Prince
Shtcherbatsky called “young bucks,” in an exceedingly open waistcoat,
straightening his white tie as he went, bowed to them, and after
running by, came back to ask Kitty for a quadrille. As the first
quadrille had already been given to Vronsky, she had to promise this
youth the second. An officer, buttoning his glove, stood aside in the
doorway, and stroking his mustache, admired rosy Kitty.

Although her dress, her coiffure, and all the preparations for the ball
had cost Kitty great trouble and consideration, at this moment she
walked into the ballroom in her elaborate tulle dress over a pink slip
as easily and simply as though all the rosettes and lace, all the
minute details of her attire, had not cost her or her family a moment’s
attention, as though she had been born in that tulle and lace, with her
hair done up high on her head, and a rose and two leaves on the top of
it.

When, just before entering the ballroom, the princess, her mother,
tried to turn right side out of the ribbon of her sash, Kitty had drawn
back a little. She felt that everything must be right of itself, and
graceful, and nothing could need setting straight.

It was one of Kitty’s best days. Her dress was not uncomfortable
anywhere; her lace berthe did not droop anywhere; her rosettes were not
crushed nor torn off; her pink slippers with high, hollowed-out heels
did not pinch, but gladdened her feet; and the thick rolls of fair
chignon kept up on her head as if they were her own hair. All the three
buttons buttoned up without tearing on the long glove that covered her
hand without concealing its lines. The black velvet of her locket
nestled with special softness round her neck. That velvet was
delicious; at home, looking at her neck in the looking-glass, Kitty had
felt that that velvet was speaking. About all the rest there might be a
doubt, but the velvet was delicious. Kitty smiled here too, at the
ball, when she glanced at it in the glass. Her bare shoulders and arms
gave Kitty a sense of chill marble, a feeling she particularly liked.
Her eyes sparkled, and her rosy lips could not keep from smiling from
the consciousness of her own attractiveness. She had scarcely entered
the ballroom and reached the throng of ladies, all tulle, ribbons,
lace, and flowers, waiting to be asked to dance—Kitty was never one of
that throng—when she was asked for a waltz, and asked by the best
partner, the first star in the hierarchy of the ballroom, a renowned
director of dances, a married man, handsome and well-built, Yegorushka
Korsunsky. He had only just left the Countess Bonina, with whom he had
danced the first half of the waltz, and, scanning his kingdom—that is
to say, a few couples who had started dancing—he caught sight of Kitty,
entering, and flew up to her with that peculiar, easy amble which is
confined to directors of balls. Without even asking her if she cared to
dance, he put out his arm to encircle her slender waist. She looked
round for someone to give her fan to, and their hostess, smiling to
her, took it.

“How nice you’ve come in good time,” he said to her, embracing her
waist; “such a bad habit to be late.” Bending her left hand, she laid
it on his shoulder, and her little feet in their pink slippers began
swiftly, lightly, and rhythmically moving over the slippery floor in
time to the music.

“It’s a rest to waltz with you,” he said to her, as they fell into the
first slow steps of the waltz. “It’s exquisite—such lightness,
precision.” He said to her the same thing he said to almost all his
partners whom he knew well.

She smiled at his praise, and continued to look about the room over his
shoulder. She was not like a girl at her first ball, for whom all faces
in the ballroom melt into one vision of fairyland. And she was not a
girl who had gone the stale round of balls till every face in the
ballroom was familiar and tiresome. But she was in the middle stage
between these two; she was excited, and at the same time she had
sufficient self-possession to be able to observe. In the left corner of
the ballroom she saw the cream of society gathered together.
There—incredibly naked—was the beauty Lidi, Korsunsky’s wife; there was
the lady of the house; there shone the bald head of Krivin, always to
be found where the best people were. In that direction gazed the young
men, not venturing to approach. There, too, she descried Stiva, and
there she saw the exquisite figure and head of Anna in a black velvet
gown. And _he_ was there. Kitty had not seen him since the evening she
refused Levin. With her long-sighted eyes, she knew him at once, and
was even aware that he was looking at her.

“Another turn, eh? You’re not tired?” said Korsunsky, a little out of
breath.

“No, thank you!”

“Where shall I take you?”

“Madame Karenina’s here, I think ... take me to her.”

“Wherever you command.”

And Korsunsky began waltzing with measured steps straight towards the
group in the left corner, continually saying, “Pardon, mesdames,
pardon, pardon, mesdames”; and steering his course through the sea of
lace, tulle, and ribbon, and not disarranging a feather, he turned his
partner sharply round, so that her slim ankles, in light transparent
stockings, were exposed to view, and her train floated out in fan shape
and covered Krivin’s knees. Korsunsky bowed, set straight his open
shirt front, and gave her his arm to conduct her to Anna Arkadyevna.
Kitty, flushed, took her train from Krivin’s knees, and, a little
giddy, looked round, seeking Anna. Anna was not in lilac, as Kitty had
so urgently wished, but in a black, low-cut, velvet gown, showing her
full throat and shoulders, that looked as though carved in old ivory,
and her rounded arms, with tiny, slender wrists. The whole gown was
trimmed with Venetian guipure. On her head, among her black hair—her
own, with no false additions—was a little wreath of pansies, and a
bouquet of the same in the black ribbon of her sash among white lace.
Her coiffure was not striking. All that was noticeable was the little
wilful tendrils of her curly hair that would always break free about
her neck and temples. Round her well-cut, strong neck was a thread of
pearls.

Kitty had been seeing Anna every day; she adored her, and had pictured
her invariably in lilac. But now seeing her in black, she felt that she
had not fully seen her charm. She saw her now as someone quite new and
surprising to her. Now she understood that Anna could not have been in
lilac, and that her charm was just that she always stood out against
her attire, that her dress could never be noticeable on her. And her
black dress, with its sumptuous lace, was not noticeable on her; it was
only the frame, and all that was seen was she—simple, natural, elegant,
and at the same time gay and eager.

She was standing holding herself, as always, very erect, and when Kitty
drew near the group she was speaking to the master of the house, her
head slightly turned towards him.

“No, I don’t throw stones,” she was saying, in answer to something,
“though I can’t understand it,” she went on, shrugging her shoulders,
and she turned at once with a soft smile of protection towards Kitty.
With a flying, feminine glance she scanned her attire, and made a
movement of her head, hardly perceptible, but understood by Kitty,
signifying approval of her dress and her looks. “You came into the room
dancing,” she added.

“This is one of my most faithful supporters,” said Korsunsky, bowing to
Anna Arkadyevna, whom he had not yet seen. “The princess helps to make
balls happy and successful. Anna Arkadyevna, a waltz?” he said, bending
down to her.

“Why, have you met?” inquired their host.

“Is there anyone we have not met? My wife and I are like white
wolves—everyone knows us,” answered Korsunsky. “A waltz, Anna
Arkadyevna?”

“I don’t dance when it’s possible not to dance,” she said.

“But tonight it’s impossible,” answered Korsunsky.

At that instant Vronsky came up.

“Well, since it’s impossible tonight, let us start,” she said, not
noticing Vronsky’s bow, and she hastily put her hand on Korsunsky’s
shoulder.

“What is she vexed with him about?” thought Kitty, discerning that Anna
had intentionally not responded to Vronsky’s bow. Vronsky went up to
Kitty reminding her of the first quadrille, and expressing his regret
that he had not seen her all this time. Kitty gazed in admiration at
Anna waltzing, and listened to him. She expected him to ask her for a
waltz, but he did not, and she glanced wonderingly at him. He flushed
slightly, and hurriedly asked her to waltz, but he had only just put
his arm round her waist and taken the first step when the music
suddenly stopped. Kitty looked into his face, which was so close to her
own, and long afterwards—for several years after—that look, full of
love, to which he made no response, cut her to the heart with an agony
of shame.

“_Pardon! pardon!_ Waltz! waltz!” shouted Korsunsky from the other side
of the room, and seizing the first young lady he came across he began
dancing himself.


Chapter 23

Vronsky and Kitty waltzed several times round the room. After the first
waltz Kitty went to her mother, and she had hardly time to say a few
words to Countess Nordston when Vronsky came up again for the first
quadrille. During the quadrille nothing of any significance was said:
there was disjointed talk between them of the Korsunskys, husband and
wife, whom he described very amusingly, as delightful children at
forty, and of the future town theater; and only once the conversation
touched her to the quick, when he asked her about Levin, whether he was
here, and added that he liked him so much. But Kitty did not expect
much from the quadrille. She looked forward with a thrill at her heart
to the mazurka. She fancied that in the mazurka everything must be
decided. The fact that he did not during the quadrille ask her for the
mazurka did not trouble her. She felt sure she would dance the mazurka
with him as she had done at former balls, and refused five young men,
saying she was engaged for the mazurka. The whole ball up to the last
quadrille was for Kitty an enchanted vision of delightful colors,
sounds, and motions. She only sat down when she felt too tired and
begged for a rest. But as she was dancing the last quadrille with one
of the tiresome young men whom she could not refuse, she chanced to be
_vis-à-vis_ with Vronsky and Anna. She had not been near Anna again
since the beginning of the evening, and now again she saw her suddenly
quite new and surprising. She saw in her the signs of that excitement
of success she knew so well in herself; she saw that she was
intoxicated with the delighted admiration she was exciting. She knew
that feeling and knew its signs, and saw them in Anna; saw the
quivering, flashing light in her eyes, and the smile of happiness and
excitement unconsciously playing on her lips, and the deliberate grace,
precision, and lightness of her movements.

“Who?” she asked herself. “All or one?” And not assisting the harassed
young man she was dancing with in the conversation, the thread of which
he had lost and could not pick up again, she obeyed with external
liveliness the peremptory shouts of Korsunsky starting them all into
the _grand rond_, and then into the _chaîne_, and at the same time she
kept watch with a growing pang at her heart. “No, it’s not the
admiration of the crowd has intoxicated her, but the adoration of one.
And that one? can it be he?” Every time he spoke to Anna the joyous
light flashed into her eyes, and the smile of happiness curved her red
lips. She seemed to make an effort to control herself, to try not to
show these signs of delight, but they came out on her face of
themselves. “But what of him?” Kitty looked at him and was filled with
terror. What was pictured so clearly to Kitty in the mirror of Anna’s
face she saw in him. What had become of his always self-possessed
resolute manner, and the carelessly serene expression of his face? Now
every time he turned to her, he bent his head, as though he would have
fallen at her feet, and in his eyes there was nothing but humble
submission and dread. “I would not offend you,” his eyes seemed every
time to be saying, “but I want to save myself, and I don’t know how.”
On his face was a look such as Kitty had never seen before.

They were speaking of common acquaintances, keeping up the most trivial
conversation, but to Kitty it seemed that every word they said was
determining their fate and hers. And strange it was that they were
actually talking of how absurd Ivan Ivanovitch was with his French, and
how the Eletsky girl might have made a better match, yet these words
had all the while consequence for them, and they were feeling just as
Kitty did. The whole ball, the whole world, everything seemed lost in
fog in Kitty’s soul. Nothing but the stern discipline of her
bringing-up supported her and forced her to do what was expected of
her, that is, to dance, to answer questions, to talk, even to smile.
But before the mazurka, when they were beginning to rearrange the
chairs and a few couples moved out of the smaller rooms into the big
room, a moment of despair and horror came for Kitty. She had refused
five partners, and now she was not dancing the mazurka. She had not
even a hope of being asked for it, because she was so successful in
society that the idea would never occur to anyone that she had remained
disengaged till now. She would have to tell her mother she felt ill and
go home, but she had not the strength to do this. She felt crushed. She
went to the furthest end of the little drawing-room and sank into a low
chair. Her light, transparent skirts rose like a cloud about her
slender waist; one bare, thin, soft, girlish arm, hanging listlessly,
was lost in the folds of her pink tunic; in the other she held her fan,
and with rapid, short strokes fanned her burning face. But while she
looked like a butterfly, clinging to a blade of grass, and just about
to open its rainbow wings for fresh flight, her heart ached with a
horrible despair.

“But perhaps I am wrong, perhaps it was not so?” And again she recalled
all she had seen.

“Kitty, what is it?” said Countess Nordston, stepping noiselessly over
the carpet towards her. “I don’t understand it.”

Kitty’s lower lip began to quiver; she got up quickly.

“Kitty, you’re not dancing the mazurka?”

“No, no,” said Kitty in a voice shaking with tears.

“He asked her for the mazurka before me,” said Countess Nordston,
knowing Kitty would understand who were “he” and “her.” “She said:
‘Why, aren’t you going to dance it with Princess Shtcherbatskaya?’”

“Oh, I don’t care!” answered Kitty.

No one but she herself understood her position; no one knew that she
had just refused the man whom perhaps she loved, and refused him
because she had put her faith in another.

Countess Nordston found Korsunsky, with whom she was to dance the
mazurka, and told him to ask Kitty.

Kitty danced in the first couple, and luckily for her she had not to
talk, because Korsunsky was all the time running about directing the
figure. Vronsky and Anna sat almost opposite her. She saw them with her
long-sighted eyes, and saw them, too, close by, when they met in the
figures, and the more she saw of them the more convinced was she that
her unhappiness was complete. She saw that they felt themselves alone
in that crowded room. And on Vronsky’s face, always so firm and
independent, she saw that look that had struck her, of bewilderment and
humble submissiveness, like the expression of an intelligent dog when
it has done wrong.

Anna smiled, and her smile was reflected by him. She grew thoughtful,
and he became serious. Some supernatural force drew Kitty’s eyes to
Anna’s face. She was fascinating in her simple black dress, fascinating
were her round arms with their bracelets, fascinating was her firm neck
with its thread of pearls, fascinating the straying curls of her loose
hair, fascinating the graceful, light movements of her little feet and
hands, fascinating was that lovely face in its eagerness, but there was
something terrible and cruel in her fascination.

Kitty admired her more than ever, and more and more acute was her
suffering. Kitty felt overwhelmed, and her face showed it. When Vronsky
saw her, coming across her in the mazurka, he did not at once recognize
her, she was so changed.

“Delightful ball!” he said to her, for the sake of saying something.

“Yes,” she answered.

In the middle of the mazurka, repeating a complicated figure, newly
invented by Korsunsky, Anna came forward into the center of the circle,
chose two gentlemen, and summoned a lady and Kitty. Kitty gazed at her
in dismay as she went up. Anna looked at her with drooping eyelids, and
smiled, pressing her hand. But, noticing that Kitty only responded to
her smile by a look of despair and amazement, she turned away from her,
and began gaily talking to the other lady.

“Yes, there is something uncanny, devilish and fascinating in her,”
Kitty said to herself.

Anna did not mean to stay to supper, but the master of the house began
to press her to do so.

“Nonsense, Anna Arkadyevna,” said Korsunsky, drawing her bare arm under
the sleeve of his dress coat, “I’ve such an idea for a _cotillion! Un
bijou!_”

And he moved gradually on, trying to draw her along with him. Their
host smiled approvingly.

“No, I am not going to stay,” answered Anna, smiling, but in spite of
her smile, both Korsunsky and the master of the house saw from her
resolute tone that she would not stay.

“No; why, as it is, I have danced more at your ball in Moscow than I
have all the winter in Petersburg,” said Anna, looking round at
Vronsky, who stood near her. “I must rest a little before my journey.”

“Are you certainly going tomorrow then?” asked Vronsky.

“Yes, I suppose so,” answered Anna, as it were wondering at the
boldness of his question; but the irrepressible, quivering brilliance
of her eyes and her smile set him on fire as she said it.

Anna Arkadyevna did not stay to supper, but went home.


Chapter 24

“Yes, there is something in me hateful, repulsive,” thought Levin, as
he came away from the Shtcherbatskys’, and walked in the direction of
his brother’s lodgings. “And I don’t get on with other people. Pride,
they say. No, I have no pride. If I had any pride, I should not have
put myself in such a position.” And he pictured to himself Vronsky,
happy, good-natured, clever, and self-possessed, certainly never placed
in the awful position in which he had been that evening. “Yes, she was
bound to choose him. So it had to be, and I cannot complain of anyone
or anything. I am myself to blame. What right had I to imagine she
would care to join her life to mine? Who am I and what am I? A nobody,
not wanted by anyone, nor of use to anybody.” And he recalled his
brother Nikolay, and dwelt with pleasure on the thought of him. “Isn’t
he right that everything in the world is base and loathsome? And are we
fair in our judgment of brother Nikolay? Of course, from the point of
view of Prokofy, seeing him in a torn cloak and tipsy, he’s a
despicable person. But I know him differently. I know his soul, and
know that we are like him. And I, instead of going to seek him out,
went out to dinner, and came here.” Levin walked up to a lamppost, read
his brother’s address, which was in his pocketbook, and called a
sledge. All the long way to his brother’s, Levin vividly recalled all
the facts familiar to him of his brother Nikolay’s life. He remembered
how his brother, while at the university, and for a year afterwards,
had, in spite of the jeers of his companions, lived like a monk,
strictly observing all religious rites, services, and fasts, and
avoiding every sort of pleasure, especially women. And afterwards, how
he had all at once broken out: he had associated with the most horrible
people, and rushed into the most senseless debauchery. He remembered
later the scandal over a boy, whom he had taken from the country to
bring up, and, in a fit of rage, had so violently beaten that
proceedings were brought against him for unlawfully wounding. Then he
recalled the scandal with a sharper, to whom he had lost money, and
given a promissory note, and against whom he had himself lodged a
complaint, asserting that he had cheated him. (This was the money
Sergey Ivanovitch had paid.) Then he remembered how he had spent a
night in the lockup for disorderly conduct in the street. He remembered
the shameful proceedings he had tried to get up against his brother
Sergey Ivanovitch, accusing him of not having paid him his share of his
mother’s fortune, and the last scandal, when he had gone to a western
province in an official capacity, and there had got into trouble for
assaulting a village elder.... It was all horribly disgusting, yet to
Levin it appeared not at all in the same disgusting light as it
inevitably would to those who did not know Nikolay, did not know all
his story, did not know his heart.

Levin remembered that when Nikolay had been in the devout stage, the
period of fasts and monks and church services, when he was seeking in
religion a support and a curb for his passionate temperament, everyone,
far from encouraging him, had jeered at him, and he, too, with the
others. They had teased him, called him Noah, and monk; and, when he
had broken out, no one had helped him, but everyone had turned away
from him with horror and disgust.

Levin felt that, in spite of all the ugliness of his life, his brother
Nikolay, in his soul, in the very depths of his soul, was no more in
the wrong than the people who despised him. He was not to blame for
having been born with his unbridled temperament and his somehow limited
intelligence. But he had always wanted to be good. “I will tell him
everything, without reserve, and I will make him speak without reserve,
too, and I’ll show him that I love him, and so understand him,” Levin
resolved to himself, as, towards eleven o’clock, he reached the hotel
of which he had the address.

“At the top, 12 and 13,” the porter answered Levin’s inquiry.

“At home?”

“Sure to be at home.”

The door of No. 12 was half open, and there came out into the streak of
light thick fumes of cheap, poor tobacco, and the sound of a voice,
unknown to Levin; but he knew at once that his brother was there; he
heard his cough.

As he went in the door, the unknown voice was saying:

“It all depends with how much judgment and knowledge the thing’s done.”

Konstantin Levin looked in at the door, and saw that the speaker was a
young man with an immense shock of hair, wearing a Russian jerkin, and
that a pockmarked woman in a woolen gown, without collar or cuffs, was
sitting on the sofa. His brother was not to be seen. Konstantin felt a
sharp pang at his heart at the thought of the strange company in which
his brother spent his life. No one had heard him, and Konstantin,
taking off his galoshes, listened to what the gentleman in the jerkin
was saying. He was speaking of some enterprise.

“Well, the devil flay them, the privileged classes,” his brother’s
voice responded, with a cough. “Masha! get us some supper and some wine
if there’s any left; or else go and get some.”

The woman rose, came out from behind the screen, and saw Konstantin.

“There’s some gentleman, Nikolay Dmitrievitch,” she said.

“Whom do you want?” said the voice of Nikolay Levin, angrily.

“It’s I,” answered Konstantin Levin, coming forward into the light.

“Who’s _I_?” Nikolay’s voice said again, still more angrily. He could
be heard getting up hurriedly, stumbling against something, and Levin
saw, facing him in the doorway, the big, scared eyes, and the huge,
thin, stooping figure of his brother, so familiar, and yet astonishing
in its weirdness and sickliness.

He was even thinner than three years before, when Konstantin Levin had
seen him last. He was wearing a short coat, and his hands and big bones
seemed huger than ever. His hair had grown thinner, the same straight
mustaches hid his lips, the same eyes gazed strangely and naïvely at
his visitor.

“Ah, Kostya!” he exclaimed suddenly, recognizing his brother, and his
eyes lit up with joy. But the same second he looked round at the young
man, and gave the nervous jerk of his head and neck that Konstantin
knew so well, as if his neckband hurt him; and a quite different
expression, wild, suffering, and cruel, rested on his emaciated face.

“I wrote to you and Sergey Ivanovitch both that I don’t know you and
don’t want to know you. What is it you want?”

He was not at all the same as Konstantin had been fancying him. The
worst and most tiresome part of his character, what made all relations
with him so difficult, had been forgotten by Konstantin Levin when he
thought of him, and now, when he saw his face, and especially that
nervous twitching of his head, he remembered it all.

“I didn’t want to see you for anything,” he answered timidly. “I’ve
simply come to see you.”

His brother’s timidity obviously softened Nikolay. His lips twitched.

“Oh, so that’s it?” he said. “Well, come in; sit down. Like some
supper? Masha, bring supper for three. No, stop a minute. Do you know
who this is?” he said, addressing his brother, and indicating the
gentleman in the jerkin: “This is Mr. Kritsky, my friend from Kiev, a
very remarkable man. He’s persecuted by the police, of course, because
he’s not a scoundrel.”

And he looked round in the way he always did at everyone in the room.
Seeing that the woman standing in the doorway was moving to go, he
shouted to her, “Wait a minute, I said.” And with the inability to
express himself, the incoherence that Konstantin knew so well, he
began, with another look round at everyone, to tell his brother
Kritsky’s story: how he had been expelled from the university for
starting a benefit society for the poor students and Sunday schools;
and how he had afterwards been a teacher in a peasant school, and how
he had been driven out of that too, and had afterwards been condemned
for something.

“You’re of the Kiev university?” said Konstantin Levin to Kritsky, to
break the awkward silence that followed.

“Yes, I was of Kiev,” Kritsky replied angrily, his face darkening.

“And this woman,” Nikolay Levin interrupted him, pointing to her, “is
the partner of my life, Marya Nikolaevna. I took her out of a bad
house,” and he jerked his neck saying this; “but I love her and respect
her, and anyone who wants to know me,” he added, raising his voice and
knitting his brows, “I beg to love her and respect her. She’s just the
same as my wife, just the same. So now you know whom you’ve to do with.
And if you think you’re lowering yourself, well, here’s the floor,
there’s the door.”

And again his eyes traveled inquiringly over all of them.

“Why I should be lowering myself, I don’t understand.”

“Then, Masha, tell them to bring supper; three portions, spirits and
wine.... No, wait a minute.... No, it doesn’t matter.... Go along.”


Chapter 25

“So you see,” pursued Nikolay Levin, painfully wrinkling his forehead
and twitching.

It was obviously difficult for him to think of what to say and do.

“Here, do you see?”... He pointed to some sort of iron bars, fastened
together with strings, lying in a corner of the room. “Do you see that?
That’s the beginning of a new thing we’re going into. It’s a productive
association....”

Konstantin scarcely heard him. He looked into his sickly, consumptive
face, and he was more and more sorry for him, and he could not force
himself to listen to what his brother was telling him about the
association. He saw that this association was a mere anchor to save him
from self-contempt. Nikolay Levin went on talking:

“You know that capital oppresses the laborer. The laborers with us, the
peasants, bear all the burden of labor, and are so placed that however
much they work they can’t escape from their position of beasts of
burden. All the profits of labor, on which they might improve their
position, and gain leisure for themselves, and after that education,
all the surplus values are taken from them by the capitalists. And
society’s so constituted that the harder they work, the greater the
profit of the merchants and landowners, while they stay beasts of
burden to the end. And that state of things must be changed,” he
finished up, and he looked questioningly at his brother.

“Yes, of course,” said Konstantin, looking at the patch of red that had
come out on his brother’s projecting cheekbones.

“And so we’re founding a locksmiths’ association, where all the
production and profit and the chief instruments of production will be
in common.”

“Where is the association to be?” asked Konstantin Levin.

“In the village of Vozdrem, Kazan government.”

“But why in a village? In the villages, I think, there is plenty of
work as it is. Why a locksmiths’ association in a village?”

“Why? Because the peasants are just as much slaves as they ever were,
and that’s why you and Sergey Ivanovitch don’t like people to try and
get them out of their slavery,” said Nikolay Levin, exasperated by the
objection.

Konstantin Levin sighed, looking meanwhile about the cheerless and
dirty room. This sigh seemed to exasperate Nikolay still more.

“I know your and Sergey Ivanovitch’s aristocratic views. I know that he
applies all the power of his intellect to justify existing evils.”

“No; and what do you talk of Sergey Ivanovitch for?” said Levin,
smiling.

“Sergey Ivanovitch? I’ll tell you what for!” Nikolay Levin shrieked
suddenly at the name of Sergey Ivanovitch. “I’ll tell you what for....
But what’s the use of talking? There’s only one thing.... What did you
come to me for? You look down on this, and you’re welcome to,—and go
away, in God’s name go away!” he shrieked, getting up from his chair.
“And go away, and go away!”

“I don’t look down on it at all,” said Konstantin Levin timidly. “I
don’t even dispute it.”

At that instant Marya Nikolaevna came back. Nikolay Levin looked round
angrily at her. She went quickly to him, and whispered something.

“I’m not well; I’ve grown irritable,” said Nikolay Levin, getting
calmer and breathing painfully; “and then you talk to me of Sergey
Ivanovitch and his article. It’s such rubbish, such lying, such
self-deception. What can a man write of justice who knows nothing of
it? Have you read his article?” he asked Kritsky, sitting down again at
the table, and moving back off half of it the scattered cigarettes, so
as to clear a space.

“I’ve not read it,” Kritsky responded gloomily, obviously not desiring
to enter into the conversation.

“Why not?” said Nikolay Levin, now turning with exasperation upon
Kritsky.

“Because I didn’t see the use of wasting my time over it.”

“Oh, but excuse me, how did you know it would be wasting your time?
That article’s too deep for many people—that’s to say it’s over their
heads. But with me, it’s another thing; I see through his ideas, and I
know where its weakness lies.”

Everyone was mute. Kritsky got up deliberately and reached his cap.

“Won’t you have supper? All right, good-bye! Come round tomorrow with
the locksmith.”

Kritsky had hardly gone out when Nikolay Levin smiled and winked.

“He’s no good either,” he said. “I see, of course....”

But at that instant Kritsky, at the door, called him....

“What do you want now?” he said, and went out to him in the passage.
Left alone with Marya Nikolaevna, Levin turned to her.

“Have you been long with my brother?” he said to her.

“Yes, more than a year. Nikolay Dmitrievitch’s health has become very
poor. Nikolay Dmitrievitch drinks a great deal,” she said.

“That is ... how does he drink?”

“Drinks vodka, and it’s bad for him.”

“And a great deal?” whispered Levin.

“Yes,” she said, looking timidly towards the doorway, where Nikolay
Levin had reappeared.

“What were you talking about?” he said, knitting his brows, and turning
his scared eyes from one to the other. “What was it?”

“Oh, nothing,” Konstantin answered in confusion.

“Oh, if you don’t want to say, don’t. Only it’s no good your talking to
her. She’s a wench, and you’re a gentleman,” he said with a jerk of the
neck. “You understand everything, I see, and have taken stock of
everything, and look with commiseration on my shortcomings,” he began
again, raising his voice.

“Nikolay Dmitrievitch, Nikolay Dmitrievitch,” whispered Marya
Nikolaevna, again going up to him.

“Oh, very well, very well!... But where’s the supper? Ah, here it is,”
he said, seeing a waiter with a tray. “Here, set it here,” he added
angrily, and promptly seizing the vodka, he poured out a glassful and
drank it greedily. “Like a drink?” he turned to his brother, and at
once became better humored.

“Well, enough of Sergey Ivanovitch. I’m glad to see you, anyway. After
all’s said and done, we’re not strangers. Come, have a drink. Tell me
what you’re doing,” he went on, greedily munching a piece of bread, and
pouring out another glassful. “How are you living?”

“I live alone in the country, as I used to. I’m busy looking after the
land,” answered Konstantin, watching with horror the greediness with
which his brother ate and drank, and trying to conceal that he noticed
it.

“Why don’t you get married?”

“It hasn’t happened so,” Konstantin answered, reddening a little.

“Why not? For me now ... everything’s at an end! I’ve made a mess of my
life. But this I’ve said, and I say still, that if my share had been
given me when I needed it, my whole life would have been different.”

Konstantin made haste to change the conversation.

“Do you know your little Vanya’s with me, a clerk in the countinghouse
at Pokrovskoe.”

Nikolay jerked his neck, and sank into thought.

“Yes, tell me what’s going on at Pokrovskoe. Is the house standing
still, and the birch trees, and our schoolroom? And Philip the
gardener, is he living? How I remember the arbor and the seat! Now mind
and don’t alter anything in the house, but make haste and get married,
and make everything as it used to be again. Then I’ll come and see you,
if your wife is nice.”

“But come to me now,” said Levin. “How nicely we would arrange it!”

“I’d come and see you if I were sure I should not find Sergey
Ivanovitch.”

“You wouldn’t find him there. I live quite independently of him.”

“Yes, but say what you like, you will have to choose between me and
him,” he said, looking timidly into his brother’s face.

This timidity touched Konstantin.

“If you want to hear my confession of faith on the subject, I tell you
that in your quarrel with Sergey Ivanovitch I take neither side. You’re
both wrong. You’re more wrong externally, and he inwardly.”

“Ah, ah! You see that, you see that!” Nikolay shouted joyfully.

“But I personally value friendly relations with you more because....”

“Why, why?”

Konstantin could not say that he valued it more because Nikolay was
unhappy, and needed affection. But Nikolay knew that this was just what
he meant to say, and scowling he took up the vodka again.

“Enough, Nikolay Dmitrievitch!” said Marya Nikolaevna, stretching out
her plump, bare arm towards the decanter.

“Let it be! Don’t insist! I’ll beat you!” he shouted.

Marya Nikolaevna smiled a sweet and good-humored smile, which was at
once reflected on Nikolay’s face, and she took the bottle.

“And do you suppose she understands nothing?” said Nikolay. “She
understands it all better than any of us. Isn’t it true there’s
something good and sweet in her?”

“Were you never before in Moscow?” Konstantin said to her, for the sake
of saying something.

“Only you mustn’t be polite and stiff with her. It frightens her. No
one ever spoke to her so but the justices of the peace who tried her
for trying to get out of a house of ill-fame. Mercy on us, the
senselessness in the world!” he cried suddenly. “These new
institutions, these justices of the peace, rural councils, what
hideousness it all is!”

And he began to enlarge on his encounters with the new institutions.

Konstantin Levin heard him, and the disbelief in the sense of all
public institutions, which he shared with him, and often expressed, was
distasteful to him now from his brother’s lips.

“In another world we shall understand it all,” he said lightly.

“In another world! Ah, I don’t like that other world! I don’t like it,”
he said, letting his scared eyes rest on his brother’s eyes. “Here one
would think that to get out of all the baseness and the mess, one’s own
and other people’s, would be a good thing, and yet I’m afraid of death,
awfully afraid of death.” He shuddered. “But do drink something. Would
you like some champagne? Or shall we go somewhere? Let’s go to the
Gypsies! Do you know I have got so fond of the Gypsies and Russian
songs.”

His speech had begun to falter, and he passed abruptly from one subject
to another. Konstantin with the help of Masha persuaded him not to go
out anywhere, and got him to bed hopelessly drunk.

Masha promised to write to Konstantin in case of need, and to persuade
Nikolay Levin to go and stay with his brother.


Chapter 26

In the morning Konstantin Levin left Moscow, and towards evening he
reached home. On the journey in the train he talked to his neighbors
about politics and the new railways, and, just as in Moscow, he was
overcome by a sense of confusion of ideas, dissatisfaction with
himself, shame of something or other. But when he got out at his own
station, when he saw his one-eyed coachman, Ignat, with the collar of
his coat turned up; when, in the dim light reflected by the station
fires, he saw his own sledge, his own horses with their tails tied up,
in their harness trimmed with rings and tassels; when the coachman
Ignat, as he put in his luggage, told him the village news, that the
contractor had arrived, and that Pava had calved,—he felt that little
by little the confusion was clearing up, and the shame and
self-dissatisfaction were passing away. He felt this at the mere sight
of Ignat and the horses; but when he had put on the sheepskin brought
for him, had sat down wrapped up in the sledge, and had driven off
pondering on the work that lay before him in the village, and staring
at the side-horse, that had been his saddle-horse, past his prime now,
but a spirited beast from the Don, he began to see what had happened to
him in quite a different light. He felt himself, and did not want to be
anyone else. All he wanted now was to be better than before. In the
first place he resolved that from that day he would give up hoping for
any extraordinary happiness, such as marriage must have given him, and
consequently he would not so disdain what he really had. Secondly, he
would never again let himself give way to low passion, the memory of
which had so tortured him when he had been making up his mind to make
an offer. Then remembering his brother Nikolay, he resolved to himself
that he would never allow himself to forget him, that he would follow
him up, and not lose sight of him, so as to be ready to help when
things should go ill with him. And that would be soon, he felt. Then,
too, his brother’s talk of communism, which he had treated so lightly
at the time, now made him think. He considered a revolution in economic
conditions nonsense. But he always felt the injustice of his own
abundance in comparison with the poverty of the peasants, and now he
determined that so as to feel quite in the right, though he had worked
hard and lived by no means luxuriously before, he would now work still
harder, and would allow himself even less luxury. And all this seemed
to him so easy a conquest over himself that he spent the whole drive in
the pleasantest daydreams. With a resolute feeling of hope in a new,
better life, he reached home before nine o’clock at night.

The snow of the little quadrangle before the house was lit up by a
light in the bedroom windows of his old nurse, Agafea Mihalovna, who
performed the duties of housekeeper in his house. She was not yet
asleep. Kouzma, waked up by her, came sidling sleepily out onto the
steps. A setter bitch, Laska, ran out too, almost upsetting Kouzma, and
whining, turned round about Levin’s knees, jumping up and longing, but
not daring, to put her forepaws on his chest.

“You’re soon back again, sir,” said Agafea Mihalovna.

“I got tired of it, Agafea Mihalovna. With friends, one is well; but at
home, one is better,” he answered, and went into his study.

The study was slowly lit up as the candle was brought in. The familiar
details came out: the stag’s horns, the bookshelves, the looking-glass,
the stove with its ventilator, which had long wanted mending, his
father’s sofa, a large table, on the table an open book, a broken
ashtray, a manuscript book with his handwriting. As he saw all this,
there came over him for an instant a doubt of the possibility of
arranging the new life, of which he had been dreaming on the road. All
these traces of his life seemed to clutch him, and to say to him: “No,
you’re not going to get away from us, and you’re not going to be
different, but you’re going to be the same as you’ve always been; with
doubts, everlasting dissatisfaction with yourself, vain efforts to
amend, and falls, and everlasting expectation, of a happiness which you
won’t get, and which isn’t possible for you.”

This the things said to him, but another voice in his heart was telling
him that he must not fall under the sway of the past, and that one can
do anything with oneself. And hearing that voice, he went into the
corner where stood his two heavy dumbbells, and began brandishing them
like a gymnast, trying to restore his confident temper. There was a
creak of steps at the door. He hastily put down the dumbbells.

The bailiff came in, and said everything, thank God, was doing well;
but informed him that the buckwheat in the new drying machine had been
a little scorched. This piece of news irritated Levin. The new drying
machine had been constructed and partly invented by Levin. The bailiff
had always been against the drying machine, and now it was with
suppressed triumph that he announced that the buckwheat had been
scorched. Levin was firmly convinced that if the buckwheat had been
scorched, it was only because the precautions had not been taken, for
which he had hundreds of times given orders. He was annoyed, and
reprimanded the bailiff. But there had been an important and joyful
event: Pava, his best cow, an expensive beast, bought at a show, had
calved.

“Kouzma, give me my sheepskin. And you tell them to take a lantern.
I’ll come and look at her,” he said to the bailiff.

The cowhouse for the more valuable cows was just behind the house.
Walking across the yard, passing a snowdrift by the lilac tree, he went
into the cowhouse. There was the warm, steamy smell of dung when the
frozen door was opened, and the cows, astonished at the unfamiliar
light of the lantern, stirred on the fresh straw. He caught a glimpse
of the broad, smooth, black and piebald back of Hollandka. Berkoot, the
bull, was lying down with his ring in his lip, and seemed about to get
up, but thought better of it, and only gave two snorts as they passed
by him. Pava, a perfect beauty, huge as a hippopotamus, with her back
turned to them, prevented their seeing the calf, as she sniffed her all
over.

Levin went into the pen, looked Pava over, and lifted the red and
spotted calf onto her long, tottering legs. Pava, uneasy, began lowing,
but when Levin put the calf close to her she was soothed, and, sighing
heavily, began licking her with her rough tongue. The calf, fumbling,
poked her nose under her mother’s udder, and stiffened her tail out
straight.

“Here, bring the light, Fyodor, this way,” said Levin, examining the
calf. “Like the mother! though the color takes after the father; but
that’s nothing. Very good. Long and broad in the haunch. Vassily
Fedorovitch, isn’t she splendid?” he said to the bailiff, quite
forgiving him for the buckwheat under the influence of his delight in
the calf.

“How could she fail to be? Oh, Semyon the contractor came the day after
you left. You must settle with him, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” said the
bailiff. “I did inform you about the machine.”

This question was enough to take Levin back to all the details of his
work on the estate, which was on a large scale, and complicated. He
went straight from the cowhouse to the counting house, and after a
little conversation with the bailiff and Semyon the contractor, he went
back to the house and straight upstairs to the drawing-room.


Chapter 27

The house was big and old-fashioned, and Levin, though he lived alone,
had the whole house heated and used. He knew that this was stupid, he
knew that it was positively not right, and contrary to his present new
plans, but this house was a whole world to Levin. It was the world in
which his father and mother had lived and died. They had lived just the
life that to Levin seemed the ideal of perfection, and that he had
dreamed of beginning with his wife, his family.

Levin scarcely remembered his mother. His conception of her was for him
a sacred memory, and his future wife was bound to be in his imagination
a repetition of that exquisite, holy ideal of a woman that his mother
had been.

He was so far from conceiving of love for woman apart from marriage
that he positively pictured to himself first the family, and only
secondarily the woman who would give him a family. His ideas of
marriage were, consequently, quite unlike those of the great majority
of his acquaintances, for whom getting married was one of the numerous
facts of social life. For Levin it was the chief affair of life, on
which its whole happiness turned. And now he had to give up that.

When he had gone into the little drawing-room, where he always had tea,
and had settled himself in his armchair with a book, and Agafea
Mihalovna had brought him tea, and with her usual, “Well, I’ll stay a
while, sir,” had taken a chair in the window, he felt that, however
strange it might be, he had not parted from his daydreams, and that he
could not live without them. Whether with her, or with another, still
it would be. He was reading a book, and thinking of what he was
reading, and stopping to listen to Agafea Mihalovna, who gossiped away
without flagging, and yet with all that, all sorts of pictures of
family life and work in the future rose disconnectedly before his
imagination. He felt that in the depth of his soul something had been
put in its place, settled down, and laid to rest.

He heard Agafea Mihalovna talking of how Prohor had forgotten his duty
to God, and with the money Levin had given him to buy a horse, had been
drinking without stopping, and had beaten his wife till he’d half
killed her. He listened, and read his book, and recalled the whole
train of ideas suggested by his reading. It was Tyndall’s _Treatise on
Heat_. He recalled his own criticisms of Tyndall of his complacent
satisfaction in the cleverness of his experiments, and for his lack of
philosophic insight. And suddenly there floated into his mind the
joyful thought: “In two years’ time I shall have two Dutch cows; Pava
herself will perhaps still be alive, a dozen young daughters of Berkoot
and the three others—how lovely!”

He took up his book again. “Very good, electricity and heat are the
same thing; but is it possible to substitute the one quantity for the
other in the equation for the solution of any problem? No. Well, then
what of it? The connection between all the forces of nature is felt
instinctively.... It’s particulary nice if Pava’s daughter should be a
red-spotted cow, and all the herd will take after her, and the other
three, too! Splendid! To go out with my wife and visitors to meet the
herd.... My wife says, ‘Kostya and I looked after that calf like a
child.’ ‘How can it interest you so much?’ says a visitor. ‘Everything
that interests him, interests me.’ But who will she be?” And he
remembered what had happened at Moscow.... “Well, there’s nothing to be
done.... It’s not my fault. But now everything shall go on in a new
way. It’s nonsense to pretend that life won’t let one, that the past
won’t let one. One must struggle to live better, much better.”... He
raised his head, and fell to dreaming. Old Laska, who had not yet fully
digested her delight at his return, and had run out into the yard to
bark, came back wagging her tail, and crept up to him, bringing in the
scent of fresh air, put her head under his hand, and whined
plaintively, asking to be stroked.

“There, who’d have thought it?” said Agafea Mihalovna. “The dog now ...
why, she understands that her master’s come home, and that he’s
low-spirited.”

“Why low-spirited?”

“Do you suppose I don’t see it, sir? It’s high time I should know the
gentry. Why, I’ve grown up from a little thing with them. It’s nothing,
sir, so long as there’s health and a clear conscience.”

Levin looked intently at her, surprised at how well she knew his
thought.

“Shall I fetch you another cup?” said she, and taking his cup she went
out.

Laska kept poking her head under his hand. He stroked her, and she
promptly curled up at his feet, laying her head on a hindpaw. And in
token of all now being well and satisfactory, she opened her mouth a
little, smacked her lips, and settling her sticky lips more comfortably
about her old teeth, she sank into blissful repose. Levin watched all
her movements attentively.

“That’s what I’ll do,” he said to himself; “that’s what I’ll do!
Nothing’s amiss.... All’s well.”


Chapter 28

After the ball, early next morning, Anna Arkadyevna sent her husband a
telegram that she was leaving Moscow the same day.

“No, I must go, I must go”; she explained to her sister-in-law the
change in her plans in a tone that suggested that she had to remember
so many things that there was no enumerating them: “no, it had really
better be today!”

Stepan Arkadyevitch was not dining at home, but he promised to come and
see his sister off at seven o’clock.

Kitty, too, did not come, sending a note that she had a headache. Dolly
and Anna dined alone with the children and the English governess.
Whether it was that the children were fickle, or that they had acute
senses, and felt that Anna was quite different that day from what she
had been when they had taken such a fancy to her, that she was not now
interested in them,—but they had abruptly dropped their play with their
aunt, and their love for her, and were quite indifferent that she was
going away. Anna was absorbed the whole morning in preparations for her
departure. She wrote notes to her Moscow acquaintances, put down her
accounts, and packed. Altogether Dolly fancied she was not in a placid
state of mind, but in that worried mood, which Dolly knew well with
herself, and which does not come without cause, and for the most part
covers dissatisfaction with self. After dinner, Anna went up to her
room to dress, and Dolly followed her.

“How queer you are today!” Dolly said to her.

“I? Do you think so? I’m not queer, but I’m nasty. I am like that
sometimes. I keep feeling as if I could cry. It’s very stupid, but
it’ll pass off,” said Anna quickly, and she bent her flushed face over
a tiny bag in which she was packing a nightcap and some cambric
handkerchiefs. Her eyes were particularly bright, and were continually
swimming with tears. “In the same way I didn’t want to leave
Petersburg, and now I don’t want to go away from here.”

“You came here and did a good deed,” said Dolly, looking intently at
her.

Anna looked at her with eyes wet with tears.

“Don’t say that, Dolly. I’ve done nothing, and could do nothing. I
often wonder why people are all in league to spoil me. What have I
done, and what could I do? In your heart there was found love enough to
forgive....”

“If it had not been for you, God knows what would have happened! How
happy you are, Anna!” said Dolly. “Everything is clear and good in your
heart.”

“Every heart has its own _skeletons_, as the English say.”

“You have no sort of _skeleton_, have you? Everything is so clear in
you.”

“I have!” said Anna suddenly, and, unexpectedly after her tears, a sly,
ironical smile curved her lips.

“Come, he’s amusing, anyway, your _skeleton_, and not depressing,” said
Dolly, smiling.

“No, he’s depressing. Do you know why I’m going today instead of
tomorrow? It’s a confession that weighs on me; I want to make it to
you,” said Anna, letting herself drop definitely into an armchair, and
looking straight into Dolly’s face.

And to her surprise Dolly saw that Anna was blushing up to her ears, up
to the curly black ringlets on her neck.

“Yes,” Anna went on. “Do you know why Kitty didn’t come to dinner?
She’s jealous of me. I have spoiled ... I’ve been the cause of that
ball being a torture to her instead of a pleasure. But truly, truly,
it’s not my fault, or only my fault a little bit,” she said, daintily
drawling the words “a little bit.”

“Oh, how like Stiva you said that!” said Dolly, laughing.

Anna was hurt.

“Oh no, oh no! I’m not Stiva,” she said, knitting her brows. “That’s
why I’m telling you, just because I could never let myself doubt myself
for an instant,” said Anna.

But at the very moment she was uttering the words, she felt that they
were not true. She was not merely doubting herself, she felt emotion at
the thought of Vronsky, and was going away sooner than she had meant,
simply to avoid meeting him.

“Yes, Stiva told me you danced the mazurka with him, and that he....”

“You can’t imagine how absurdly it all came about. I only meant to be
matchmaking, and all at once it turned out quite differently. Possibly
against my own will....”

She crimsoned and stopped.

“Oh, they feel it directly?” said Dolly.

“But I should be in despair if there were anything serious in it on his
side,” Anna interrupted her. “And I am certain it will all be
forgotten, and Kitty will leave off hating me.”

“All the same, Anna, to tell you the truth, I’m not very anxious for
this marriage for Kitty. And it’s better it should come to nothing, if
he, Vronsky, is capable of falling in love with you in a single day.”

“Oh, heavens, that would be too silly!” said Anna, and again a deep
flush of pleasure came out on her face, when she heard the idea, that
absorbed her, put into words. “And so here I am going away, having made
an enemy of Kitty, whom I liked so much! Ah, how sweet she is! But
you’ll make it right, Dolly? Eh?”

Dolly could scarcely suppress a smile. She loved Anna, but she enjoyed
seeing that she too had her weaknesses.

“An enemy? That can’t be.”

“I did so want you all to care for me, as I do for you, and now I care
for you more than ever,” said Anna, with tears in her eyes. “Ah, how
silly I am today!”

She passed her handkerchief over her face and began dressing.

At the very moment of starting Stepan Arkadyevitch arrived, late, rosy
and good-humored, smelling of wine and cigars.

Anna’s emotionalism infected Dolly, and when she embraced her
sister-in-law for the last time, she whispered: “Remember, Anna, what
you’ve done for me—I shall never forget. And remember that I love you,
and shall always love you as my dearest friend!”

“I don’t know why,” said Anna, kissing her and hiding her tears.

“You understood me, and you understand. Good-bye, my darling!”


Chapter 29

“Come, it’s all over, and thank God!” was the first thought that came
to Anna Arkadyevna, when she had said good-bye for the last time to her
brother, who had stood blocking up the entrance to the carriage till
the third bell rang. She sat down on her lounge beside Annushka, and
looked about her in the twilight of the sleeping-carriage. “Thank God!
tomorrow I shall see Seryozha and Alexey Alexandrovitch, and my life
will go on in the old way, all nice and as usual.”

Still in the same anxious frame of mind, as she had been all that day,
Anna took pleasure in arranging herself for the journey with great
care. With her little deft hands she opened and shut her little red
bag, took out a cushion, laid it on her knees, and carefully wrapping
up her feet, settled herself comfortably. An invalid lady had already
lain down to sleep. Two other ladies began talking to Anna, and a stout
elderly lady tucked up her feet, and made observations about the
heating of the train. Anna answered a few words, but not foreseeing any
entertainment from the conversation, she asked Annushka to get a lamp,
hooked it onto the arm of her seat, and took from her bag a paper-knife
and an English novel. At first her reading made no progress. The fuss
and bustle were disturbing; then when the train had started, she could
not help listening to the noises; then the snow beating on the left
window and sticking to the pane, and the sight of the muffled guard
passing by, covered with snow on one side, and the conversations about
the terrible snowstorm raging outside, distracted her attention.
Farther on, it was continually the same again and again: the same
shaking and rattling, the same snow on the window, the same rapid
transitions from steaming heat to cold, and back again to heat, the
same passing glimpses of the same figures in the twilight, and the same
voices, and Anna began to read and to understand what she read.
Annushka was already dozing, the red bag on her lap, clutched by her
broad hands, in gloves, of which one was torn. Anna Arkadyevna read and
understood, but it was distasteful to her to read, that is, to follow
the reflection of other people’s lives. She had too great a desire to
live herself. If she read that the heroine of the novel was nursing a
sick man, she longed to move with noiseless steps about the room of a
sick man; if she read of a member of Parliament making a speech, she
longed to be delivering the speech; if she read of how Lady Mary had
ridden after the hounds, and had provoked her sister-in-law, and had
surprised everyone by her boldness, she too wished to be doing the
same. But there was no chance of doing anything; and twisting the
smooth paper-knife in her little hands, she forced herself to read.

The hero of the novel was already almost reaching his English
happiness, a baronetcy and an estate, and Anna was feeling a desire to
go with him to the estate, when she suddenly felt that _he_ ought to
feel ashamed, and that she was ashamed of the same thing. But what had
he to be ashamed of? “What have I to be ashamed of?” she asked herself
in injured surprise. She laid down the book and sank against the back
of the chair, tightly gripping the paper-cutter in both hands. There
was nothing. She went over all her Moscow recollections. All were good,
pleasant. She remembered the ball, remembered Vronsky and his face of
slavish adoration, remembered all her conduct with him: there was
nothing shameful. And for all that, at the same point in her memories,
the feeling of shame was intensified, as though some inner voice, just
at the point when she thought of Vronsky, were saying to her, “Warm,
very warm, hot.” “Well, what is it?” she said to herself resolutely,
shifting her seat in the lounge. “What does it mean? Am I afraid to
look it straight in the face? Why, what is it? Can it be that between
me and this officer boy there exist, or can exist, any other relations
than such as are common with every acquaintance?” She laughed
contemptuously and took up her book again; but now she was definitely
unable to follow what she read. She passed the paper-knife over the
window pane, then laid its smooth, cool surface to her cheek, and
almost laughed aloud at the feeling of delight that all at once without
cause came over her. She felt as though her nerves were strings being
strained tighter and tighter on some sort of screwing peg. She felt her
eyes opening wider and wider, her fingers and toes twitching nervously,
something within oppressing her breathing, while all shapes and sounds
seemed in the uncertain half-light to strike her with unaccustomed
vividness. Moments of doubt were continually coming upon her, when she
was uncertain whether the train were going forwards or backwards, or
were standing still altogether; whether it were Annushka at her side or
a stranger. “What’s that on the arm of the chair, a fur cloak or some
beast? And what am I myself? Myself or some other woman?” She was
afraid of giving way to this delirium. But something drew her towards
it, and she could yield to it or resist it at will. She got up to rouse
herself, and slipped off her plaid and the cape of her warm dress. For
a moment she regained her self-possession, and realized that the thin
peasant who had come in wearing a long overcoat, with buttons missing
from it, was the stoveheater, that he was looking at the thermometer,
that it was the wind and snow bursting in after him at the door; but
then everything grew blurred again.... That peasant with the long waist
seemed to be gnawing something on the wall, the old lady began
stretching her legs the whole length of the carriage, and filling it
with a black cloud; then there was a fearful shrieking and banging, as
though someone were being torn to pieces; then there was a blinding
dazzle of red fire before her eyes and a wall seemed to rise up and
hide everything. Anna felt as though she were sinking down. But it was
not terrible, but delightful. The voice of a man muffled up and covered
with snow shouted something in her ear. She got up and pulled herself
together; she realized that they had reached a station and that this
was the guard. She asked Annushka to hand her the cape she had taken
off and her shawl, put them on and moved towards the door.

“Do you wish to get out?” asked Annushka.

“Yes, I want a little air. It’s very hot in here.” And she opened the
door. The driving snow and the wind rushed to meet her and struggled
with her over the door. But she enjoyed the struggle.

She opened the door and went out. The wind seemed as though lying in
wait for her; with gleeful whistle it tried to snatch her up and bear
her off, but she clung to the cold door post, and holding her skirt got
down onto the platform and under the shelter of the carriages. The wind
had been powerful on the steps, but on the platform, under the lee of
the carriages, there was a lull. With enjoyment she drew deep breaths
of the frozen, snowy air, and standing near the carriage looked about
the platform and the lighted station.


Chapter 30

The raging tempest rushed whistling between the wheels of the
carriages, about the scaffolding, and round the corner of the station.
The carriages, posts, people, everything that was to be seen was
covered with snow on one side, and was getting more and more thickly
covered. For a moment there would come a lull in the storm, but then it
would swoop down again with such onslaughts that it seemed impossible
to stand against it. Meanwhile men ran to and fro, talking merrily
together, their steps crackling on the platform as they continually
opened and closed the big doors. The bent shadow of a man glided by at
her feet, and she heard sounds of a hammer upon iron. “Hand over that
telegram!” came an angry voice out of the stormy darkness on the other
side. “This way! No. 28!” several different voices shouted again, and
muffled figures ran by covered with snow. Two gentlemen with lighted
cigarettes passed by her. She drew one more deep breath of the fresh
air, and had just put her hand out of her muff to take hold of the door
post and get back into the carriage, when another man in a military
overcoat, quite close beside her, stepped between her and the
flickering light of the lamp post. She looked round, and the same
instant recognized Vronsky’s face. Putting his hand to the peak of his
cap, he bowed to her and asked, Was there anything she wanted? Could he
be of any service to her? She gazed rather a long while at him without
answering, and, in spite of the shadow in which he was standing, she
saw, or fancied she saw, both the expression of his face and his eyes.
It was again that expression of reverential ecstasy which had so worked
upon her the day before. More than once she had told herself during the
past few days, and again only a few moments before, that Vronsky was
for her only one of the hundreds of young men, forever exactly the
same, that are met everywhere, that she would never allow herself to
bestow a thought upon him. But now at the first instant of meeting him,
she was seized by a feeling of joyful pride. She had no need to ask why
he had come. She knew as certainly as if he had told her that he was
here to be where she was.

“I didn’t know you were going. What are you coming for?” she said,
letting fall the hand with which she had grasped the door post. And
irrepressible delight and eagerness shone in her face.

“What am I coming for?” he repeated, looking straight into her eyes.
“You know that I have come to be where you are,” he said; “I can’t help
it.”

At that moment the wind, as it were, surmounting all obstacles, sent
the snow flying from the carriage roofs, and clanked some sheet of iron
it had torn off, while the hoarse whistle of the engine roared in
front, plaintively and gloomily. All the awfulness of the storm seemed
to her more splendid now. He had said what her soul longed to hear,
though she feared it with her reason. She made no answer, and in her
face he saw conflict.

“Forgive me, if you dislike what I said,” he said humbly.

He had spoken courteously, deferentially, yet so firmly, so stubbornly,
that for a long while she could make no answer.

“It’s wrong, what you say, and I beg you, if you’re a good man, to
forget what you’ve said, as I forget it,” she said at last.

“Not one word, not one gesture of yours shall I, could I, ever
forget....”

“Enough, enough!” she cried trying assiduously to give a stern
expression to her face, into which he was gazing greedily. And
clutching at the cold door post, she clambered up the steps and got
rapidly into the corridor of the carriage. But in the little corridor
she paused, going over in her imagination what had happened. Though she
could not recall her own words or his, she realized instinctively that
the momentary conversation had brought them fearfully closer; and she
was panic-stricken and blissful at it. After standing still a few
seconds, she went into the carriage and sat down in her place. The
overstrained condition which had tormented her before did not only come
back, but was intensified, and reached such a pitch that she was afraid
every minute that something would snap within her from the excessive
tension. She did not sleep all night. But in that nervous tension, and
in the visions that filled her imagination, there was nothing
disagreeable or gloomy: on the contrary there was something blissful,
glowing, and exhilarating. Towards morning Anna sank into a doze,
sitting in her place, and when she waked it was daylight and the train
was near Petersburg. At once thoughts of home, of husband and of son,
and the details of that day and the following came upon her.

At Petersburg, as soon as the train stopped and she got out, the first
person that attracted her attention was her husband. “Oh, mercy! why do
his ears look like that?” she thought, looking at his frigid and
imposing figure, and especially the ears that struck her at the moment
as propping up the brim of his round hat. Catching sight of her, he
came to meet her, his lips falling into their habitual sarcastic smile,
and his big, tired eyes looking straight at her. An unpleasant
sensation gripped at her heart when she met his obstinate and weary
glance, as though she had expected to see him different. She was
especially struck by the feeling of dissatisfaction with herself that
she experienced on meeting him. That feeling was an intimate, familiar
feeling, like a consciousness of hypocrisy, which she experienced in
her relations with her husband. But hitherto she had not taken note of
the feeling, now she was clearly and painfully aware of it.

“Yes, as you see, your tender spouse, as devoted as the first year
after marriage, burned with impatience to see you,” he said in his
deliberate, high-pitched voice, and in that tone which he almost always
took with her, a tone of jeering at anyone who should say in earnest
what he said.

“Is Seryozha quite well?” she asked.

“And is this all the reward,” said he, “for my ardor? He’s quite
well....”


Chapter 31

Vronsky had not even tried to sleep all that night. He sat in his
armchair, looking straight before him or scanning the people who got in
and out. If he had indeed on previous occasions struck and impressed
people who did not know him by his air of unhesitating composure, he
seemed now more haughty and self-possessed than ever. He looked at
people as if they were things. A nervous young man, a clerk in a law
court, sitting opposite him, hated him for that look. The young man
asked him for a light, and entered into conversation with him, and even
pushed against him, to make him feel that he was not a thing, but a
person. But Vronsky gazed at him exactly as he did at the lamp, and the
young man made a wry face, feeling that he was losing his
self-possession under the oppression of this refusal to recognize him
as a person.

Vronsky saw nothing and no one. He felt himself a king, not because he
believed that he had made an impression on Anna—he did not yet believe
that,—but because the impression she had made on him gave him happiness
and pride.

What would come of it all he did not know, he did not even think. He
felt that all his forces, hitherto dissipated, wasted, were centered on
one thing, and bent with fearful energy on one blissful goal. And he
was happy at it. He knew only that he had told her the truth, that he
had come where she was, that all the happiness of his life, the only
meaning in life for him, now lay in seeing and hearing her. And when he
got out of the carriage at Bologova to get some seltzer water, and
caught sight of Anna, involuntarily his first word had told her just
what he thought. And he was glad he had told her it, that she knew it
now and was thinking of it. He did not sleep all night. When he was
back in the carriage, he kept unceasingly going over every position in
which he had seen her, every word she had uttered, and before his
fancy, making his heart faint with emotion, floated pictures of a
possible future.

When he got out of the train at Petersburg, he felt after his sleepless
night as keen and fresh as after a cold bath. He paused near his
compartment, waiting for her to get out. “Once more,” he said to
himself, smiling unconsciously, “once more I shall see her walk, her
face; she will say something, turn her head, glance, smile, maybe.” But
before he caught sight of her, he saw her husband, whom the
station-master was deferentially escorting through the crowd. “Ah, yes!
The husband.” Only now for the first time did Vronsky realize clearly
the fact that there was a person attached to her, a husband. He knew
that she had a husband, but had hardly believed in his existence, and
only now fully believed in him, with his head and shoulders, and his
legs clad in black trousers; especially when he saw this husband calmly
take her arm with a sense of property.

Seeing Alexey Alexandrovitch with his Petersburg face and severely
self-confident figure, in his round hat, with his rather prominent
spine, he believed in him, and was aware of a disagreeable sensation,
such as a man might feel tortured by thirst, who, on reaching a spring,
should find a dog, a sheep, or a pig, who has drunk of it and muddied
the water. Alexey Alexandrovitch’s manner of walking, with a swing of
the hips and flat feet, particularly annoyed Vronsky. He could
recognize in no one but himself an indubitable right to love her. But
she was still the same, and the sight of her affected him the same way,
physically reviving him, stirring him, and filling his soul with
rapture. He told his German valet, who ran up to him from the second
class, to take his things and go on, and he himself went up to her. He
saw the first meeting between the husband and wife, and noted with a
lover’s insight the signs of slight reserve with which she spoke to her
husband. “No, she does not love him and cannot love him,” he decided to
himself.

At the moment when he was approaching Anna Arkadyevna he noticed too
with joy that she was conscious of his being near, and looked round,
and seeing him, turned again to her husband.

“Have you passed a good night?” he asked, bowing to her and her husband
together, and leaving it up to Alexey Alexandrovitch to accept the bow
on his own account, and to recognize it or not, as he might see fit.

“Thank you, very good,” she answered.

Her face looked weary, and there was not that play of eagerness in it,
peeping out in her smile and her eyes; but for a single instant, as she
glanced at him, there was a flash of something in her eyes, and
although the flash died away at once, he was happy for that moment. She
glanced at her husband to find out whether he knew Vronsky. Alexey
Alexandrovitch looked at Vronsky with displeasure, vaguely recalling
who this was. Vronsky’s composure and self-confidence here struck, like
a scythe against a stone, upon the cold self-confidence of Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

“Count Vronsky,” said Anna.

“Ah! We are acquainted, I believe,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch
indifferently, giving his hand.

“You set off with the mother and you return with the son,” he said,
articulating each syllable, as though each were a separate favor he was
bestowing.

“You’re back from leave, I suppose?” he said, and without waiting for a
reply, he turned to his wife in his jesting tone: “Well, were a great
many tears shed at Moscow at parting?”

By addressing his wife like this he gave Vronsky to understand that he
wished to be left alone, and, turning slightly towards him, he touched
his hat; but Vronsky turned to Anna Arkadyevna.

“I hope I may have the honor of calling on you,” he said.

Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced with his weary eyes at Vronsky.

“Delighted,” he said coldly. “On Mondays we’re at home. Most
fortunate,” he said to his wife, dismissing Vronsky altogether, “that I
should just have half an hour to meet you, so that I can prove my
devotion,” he went on in the same jesting tone.

“You lay too much stress on your devotion for me to value it much,” she
responded in the same jesting tone, involuntarily listening to the
sound of Vronsky’s steps behind them. “But what has it to do with me?”
she said to herself, and she began asking her husband how Seryozha had
got on without her.

“Oh, capitally! Mariette says he has been very good, And ... I must
disappoint you ... but he has not missed you as your husband has. But
once more _merci,_ my dear, for giving me a day. Our dear _Samovar_
will be delighted.” (He used to call the Countess Lidia Ivanovna, well
known in society, a samovar, because she was always bubbling over with
excitement.) “She has been continually asking after you. And, do you
know, if I may venture to advise you, you should go and see her today.
You know how she takes everything to heart. Just now, with all her own
cares, she’s anxious about the Oblonskys being brought together.”

The Countess Lidia Ivanovna was a friend of her husband’s, and the
center of that one of the coteries of the Petersburg world with which
Anna was, through her husband, in the closest relations.

“But you know I wrote to her?”

“Still she’ll want to hear details. Go and see her, if you’re not too
tired, my dear. Well, Kondraty will take you in the carriage, while I
go to my committee. I shall not be alone at dinner again,” Alexey
Alexandrovitch went on, no longer in a sarcastic tone. “You wouldn’t
believe how I’ve missed....” And with a long pressure of her hand and a
meaning smile, he put her in her carriage.


Chapter 32

The first person to meet Anna at home was her son. He dashed down the
stairs to her, in spite of the governess’s call, and with desperate joy
shrieked: “Mother! mother!” Running up to her, he hung on her neck.

“I told you it was mother!” he shouted to the governess. “I knew!”

And her son, like her husband, aroused in Anna a feeling akin to
disappointment. She had imagined him better than he was in reality. She
had to let herself drop down to the reality to enjoy him as he really
was. But even as he was, he was charming, with his fair curls, his blue
eyes, and his plump, graceful little legs in tightly pulled-up
stockings. Anna experienced almost physical pleasure in the sensation
of his nearness, and his caresses, and moral soothing, when she met his
simple, confiding, and loving glance, and heard his naïve questions.
Anna took out the presents Dolly’s children had sent him, and told her
son what sort of little girl was Tanya at Moscow, and how Tanya could
read, and even taught the other children.

“Why, am I not so nice as she?” asked Seryozha.

“To me you’re nicer than anyone in the world.”

“I know that,” said Seryozha, smiling.

Anna had not had time to drink her coffee when the Countess Lidia
Ivanovna was announced. The Countess Lidia Ivanovna was a tall, stout
woman, with an unhealthily sallow face and splendid, pensive black
eyes. Anna liked her, but today she seemed to be seeing her for the
first time with all her defects.

“Well, my dear, so you took the olive branch?” inquired Countess Lidia
Ivanovna, as soon as she came into the room.

“Yes, it’s all over, but it was all much less serious than we had
supposed,” answered Anna. “My _belle-sœur_ is in general too hasty.”

But Countess Lidia Ivanovna, though she was interested in everything
that did not concern her, had a habit of never listening to what
interested her; she interrupted Anna:

“Yes, there’s plenty of sorrow and evil in the world. I am so worried
today.”

“Oh, why?” asked Anna, trying to suppress a smile.

“I’m beginning to be weary of fruitlessly championing the truth, and
sometimes I’m quite unhinged by it. The Society of the Little Sisters”
(this was a religiously-patriotic, philanthropic institution) “was
going splendidly, but with these gentlemen it’s impossible to do
anything,” added Countess Lidia Ivanovna in a tone of ironical
submission to destiny. “They pounce on the idea, and distort it, and
then work it out so pettily and unworthily. Two or three people, your
husband among them, understand all the importance of the thing, but the
others simply drag it down. Yesterday Pravdin wrote to me....”

Pravdin was a well-known Panslavist abroad, and Countess Lidia Ivanovna
described the purport of his letter.

Then the countess told her of more disagreements and intrigues against
the work of the unification of the churches, and departed in haste, as
she had that day to be at the meeting of some society and also at the
Slavonic committee.

“It was all the same before, of course; but why was it I didn’t notice
it before?” Anna asked herself. “Or has she been very much irritated
today? It’s really ludicrous; her object is doing good; she a
Christian, yet she’s always angry; and she always has enemies, and
always enemies in the name of Christianity and doing good.”

After Countess Lidia Ivanovna another friend came, the wife of a chief
secretary, who told her all the news of the town. At three o’clock she
too went away, promising to come to dinner. Alexey Alexandrovitch was
at the ministry. Anna, left alone, spent the time till dinner in
assisting at her son’s dinner (he dined apart from his parents) and in
putting her things in order, and in reading and answering the notes and
letters which had accumulated on her table.

The feeling of causeless shame, which she had felt on the journey, and
her excitement, too, had completely vanished. In the habitual
conditions of her life she felt again resolute and irreproachable.

She recalled with wonder her state of mind on the previous day. “What
was it? Nothing. Vronsky said something silly, which it was easy to put
a stop to, and I answered as I ought to have done. To speak of it to my
husband would be unnecessary and out of the question. To speak of it
would be to attach importance to what has no importance.” She
remembered how she had told her husband of what was almost a
declaration made her at Petersburg by a young man, one of her husband’s
subordinates, and how Alexey Alexandrovitch had answered that every
woman living in the world was exposed to such incidents, but that he
had the fullest confidence in her tact, and could never lower her and
himself by jealousy. “So then there’s no reason to speak of it? And
indeed, thank God, there’s nothing to speak of,” she told herself.


Chapter 33

Alexey Alexandrovitch came back from the meeting of the ministers at
four o’clock, but as often happened, he had not time to come in to her.
He went into his study to see the people waiting for him with
petitions, and to sign some papers brought him by his chief secretary.
At dinner time (there were always a few people dining with the
Karenins) there arrived an old lady, a cousin of Alexey Alexandrovitch,
the chief secretary of the department and his wife, and a young man who
had been recommended to Alexey Alexandrovitch for the service. Anna
went into the drawing-room to receive these guests. Precisely at five
o’clock, before the bronze Peter the First clock had struck the fifth
stroke, Alexey Alexandrovitch came in, wearing a white tie and evening
coat with two stars, as he had to go out directly after dinner. Every
minute of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s life was portioned out and occupied.
And to make time to get through all that lay before him every day, he
adhered to the strictest punctuality. “Unhasting and unresting,” was
his motto. He came into the dining hall, greeted everyone, and
hurriedly sat down, smiling to his wife.

“Yes, my solitude is over. You wouldn’t believe how uncomfortable” (he
laid stress on the word _uncomfortable_) “it is to dine alone.”

At dinner he talked a little to his wife about Moscow matters, and,
with a sarcastic smile, asked her after Stepan Arkadyevitch; but the
conversation was for the most part general, dealing with Petersburg
official and public news. After dinner he spent half an hour with his
guests, and again, with a smile, pressed his wife’s hand, withdrew, and
drove off to the council. Anna did not go out that evening either to
the Princess Betsy Tverskaya, who, hearing of her return, had invited
her, nor to the theater, where she had a box for that evening. She did
not go out principally because the dress she had reckoned upon was not
ready. Altogether, Anna, on turning, after the departure of her guests,
to the consideration of her attire, was very much annoyed. She was
generally a mistress of the art of dressing well without great expense,
and before leaving Moscow she had given her dressmaker three dresses to
transform. The dresses had to be altered so that they could not be
recognized, and they ought to have been ready three days before. It
appeared that two dresses had not been done at all, while the other one
had not been altered as Anna had intended. The dressmaker came to
explain, declaring that it would be better as she had done it, and Anna
was so furious that she felt ashamed when she thought of it afterwards.
To regain her serenity completely she went into the nursery, and spent
the whole evening with her son, put him to bed herself, signed him with
the cross, and tucked him up. She was glad she had not gone out
anywhere, and had spent the evening so well. She felt so light-hearted
and serene, she saw so clearly that all that had seemed to her so
important on her railway journey was only one of the common trivial
incidents of fashionable life, and that she had no reason to feel
ashamed before anyone else or before herself. Anna sat down at the
hearth with an English novel and waited for her husband. Exactly at
half-past nine she heard his ring, and he came into the room.

“Here you are at last!” she observed, holding out her hand to him.

He kissed her hand and sat down beside her.

“Altogether then, I see your visit was a success,” he said to her.

“Oh, yes,” she said, and she began telling him about everything from
the beginning: her journey with Countess Vronskaya, her arrival, the
accident at the station. Then she described the pity she had felt,
first for her brother, and afterwards for Dolly.

“I imagine one cannot exonerate such a man from blame, though he is
your brother,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch severely.

Anna smiled. She knew that he said that simply to show that family
considerations could not prevent him from expressing his genuine
opinion. She knew that characteristic in her husband, and liked it.

“I am glad it has all ended so satisfactorily, and that you are back
again,” he went on. “Come, what do they say about the new act I have
got passed in the council?”

Anna had heard nothing of this act, and she felt conscience-stricken at
having been able so readily to forget what was to him of such
importance.

“Here, on the other hand, it has made a great sensation,” he said, with
a complacent smile.

She saw that Alexey Alexandrovitch wanted to tell her something
pleasant to him about it, and she brought him by questions to telling
it. With the same complacent smile he told her of the ovations he had
received in consequence of the act he had passed.

“I was very, very glad. It shows that at last a reasonable and steady
view of the matter is becoming prevalent among us.”

Having drunk his second cup of tea with cream, and bread, Alexey
Alexandrovitch got up, and was going towards his study.

“And you’ve not been anywhere this evening? You’ve been dull, I
expect?” he said.

“Oh, no!” she answered, getting up after him and accompanying him
across the room to his study. “What are you reading now?” she asked.

“Just now I’m reading Duc de Lille, _Poésie des Enfers,_” he answered.
“A very remarkable book.”

Anna smiled, as people smile at the weaknesses of those they love, and,
putting her hand under his, she escorted him to the door of the study.
She knew his habit, that had grown into a necessity, of reading in the
evening. She knew, too, that in spite of his official duties, which
swallowed up almost the whole of his time, he considered it his duty to
keep up with everything of note that appeared in the intellectual
world. She knew, too, that he was really interested in books dealing
with politics, philosophy, and theology, that art was utterly foreign
to his nature; but, in spite of this, or rather, in consequence of it,
Alexey Alexandrovitch never passed over anything in the world of art,
but made it his duty to read everything. She knew that in politics, in
philosophy, in theology, Alexey Alexandrovitch often had doubts, and
made investigations; but on questions of art and poetry, and, above
all, of music, of which he was totally devoid of understanding, he had
the most distinct and decided opinions. He was fond of talking about
Shakespeare, Raphael, Beethoven, of the significance of new schools of
poetry and music, all of which were classified by him with very
conspicuous consistency.

“Well, God be with you,” she said at the door of the study, where a
shaded candle and a decanter of water were already put by his armchair.
“And I’ll write to Moscow.”

He pressed her hand, and again kissed it.

“All the same he’s a good man; truthful, good-hearted, and remarkable
in his own line,” Anna said to herself going back to her room, as
though she were defending him to someone who had attacked him and said
that one could not love him. “But why is it his ears stick out so
strangely? Or has he had his hair cut?”

Precisely at twelve o’clock, when Anna was still sitting at her
writing-table, finishing a letter to Dolly, she heard the sound of
measured steps in slippers, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, freshly washed
and combed, with a book under his arm, came in to her.

“It’s time, it’s time,” said he, with a meaning smile, and he went into
their bedroom.

“And what right had he to look at him like that?” thought Anna,
recalling Vronsky’s glance at Alexey Alexandrovitch.

Undressing, she went into the bedroom; but her face had none of the
eagerness which, during her stay in Moscow, had fairly flashed from her
eyes and her smile; on the contrary, now the fire seemed quenched in
her, hidden somewhere far away.


Chapter 34

When Vronsky went to Moscow from Petersburg, he had left his large set
of rooms in Morskaia to his friend and favorite comrade Petritsky.

Petritsky was a young lieutenant, not particularly well-connected, and
not merely not wealthy, but always hopelessly in debt. Towards evening
he was always drunk, and he had often been locked up after all sorts of
ludicrous and disgraceful scandals, but he was a favorite both of his
comrades and his superior officers. On arriving at twelve o’clock from
the station at his flat, Vronsky saw, at the outer door, a hired
carriage familiar to him. While still outside his own door, as he rang,
he heard masculine laughter, the lisp of a feminine voice, and
Petritsky’s voice. “If that’s one of the villains, don’t let him in!”
Vronsky told the servant not to announce him, and slipped quietly into
the first room. Baroness Shilton, a friend of Petritsky’s, with a rosy
little face and flaxen hair, resplendent in a lilac satin gown, and
filling the whole room, like a canary, with her Parisian chatter, sat
at the round table making coffee. Petritsky, in his overcoat, and the
cavalry captain Kamerovsky, in full uniform, probably just come from
duty, were sitting each side of her.

“Bravo! Vronsky!” shouted Petritsky, jumping up, scraping his chair.
“Our host himself! Baroness, some coffee for him out of the new coffee
pot. Why, we didn’t expect you! Hope you’re satisfied with the ornament
of your study,” he said, indicating the baroness. “You know each other,
of course?”

“I should think so,” said Vronsky, with a bright smile, pressing the
baroness’s little hand. “What next! I’m an old friend.”

“You’re home after a journey,” said the baroness, “so I’m flying. Oh,
I’ll be off this minute, if I’m in the way.”

“You’re home, wherever you are, baroness,” said Vronsky. “How do you
do, Kamerovsky?” he added, coldly shaking hands with Kamerovsky.

“There, you never know how to say such pretty things,” said the
baroness, turning to Petritsky.

“No; what’s that for? After dinner I say things quite as good.”

“After dinner there’s no credit in them? Well, then, I’ll make you some
coffee, so go and wash and get ready,” said the baroness, sitting down
again, and anxiously turning the screw in the new coffee pot. “Pierre,
give me the coffee,” she said, addressing Petritsky, whom she called
Pierre as a contraction of his surname, making no secret of her
relations with him. “I’ll put it in.”

“You’ll spoil it!”

“No, I won’t spoil it! Well, and your wife?” said the baroness
suddenly, interrupting Vronsky’s conversation with his comrade. “We’ve
been marrying you here. Have you brought your wife?”

“No, baroness. I was born a Bohemian, and a Bohemian I shall die.”

“So much the better, so much the better. Shake hands on it.”

And the baroness, detaining Vronsky, began telling him, with many
jokes, about her last new plans of life, asking his advice.

“He persists in refusing to give me a divorce! Well, what am I to do?”
(_He_ was her husband.) “Now I want to begin a suit against him. What
do you advise? Kamerovsky, look after the coffee; it’s boiling over.
You see, I’m engrossed with business! I want a lawsuit, because I must
have my property. Do you understand the folly of it, that on the
pretext of my being unfaithful to him,” she said contemptuously, “he
wants to get the benefit of my fortune.”

Vronsky heard with pleasure this light-hearted prattle of a pretty
woman, agreed with her, gave her half-joking counsel, and altogether
dropped at once into the tone habitual to him in talking to such women.
In his Petersburg world all people were divided into utterly opposed
classes. One, the lower class, vulgar, stupid, and, above all,
ridiculous people, who believe that one husband ought to live with the
one wife whom he has lawfully married; that a girl should be innocent,
a woman modest, and a man manly, self-controlled, and strong; that one
ought to bring up one’s children, earn one’s bread, and pay one’s
debts; and various similar absurdities. This was the class of
old-fashioned and ridiculous people. But there was another class of
people, the real people. To this class they all belonged, and in it the
great thing was to be elegant, generous, plucky, gay, to abandon
oneself without a blush to every passion, and to laugh at everything
else.

For the first moment only, Vronsky was startled after the impression of
a quite different world that he had brought with him from Moscow. But
immediately as though slipping his feet into old slippers, he dropped
back into the light-hearted, pleasant world he had always lived in.

The coffee was never really made, but spluttered over everyone, and
boiled away, doing just what was required of it—that is, providing much
cause for much noise and laughter, and spoiling a costly rug and the
baroness’s gown.

“Well now, good-bye, or you’ll never get washed, and I shall have on my
conscience the worst sin a gentleman can commit. So you would advise a
knife to his throat?”

“To be sure, and manage that your hand may not be far from his lips.
He’ll kiss your hand, and all will end satisfactorily,” answered
Vronsky.

“So at the Français!” and, with a rustle of her skirts, she vanished.

Kamerovsky got up too, and Vronsky, not waiting for him to go, shook
hands and went off to his dressing-room.

While he was washing, Petritsky described to him in brief outlines his
position, as far as it had changed since Vronsky had left Petersburg.
No money at all. His father said he wouldn’t give him any and pay his
debts. His tailor was trying to get him locked up, and another fellow,
too, was threatening to get him locked up. The colonel of the regiment
had announced that if these scandals did not cease he would have to
leave. As for the baroness, he was sick to death of her, especially
since she’d taken to offering continually to lend him money. But he had
found a girl—he’d show her to Vronsky—a marvel, exquisite, in the
strict Oriental style, “genre of the slave Rebecca, don’t you know.”
He’d had a row, too, with Berkoshov, and was going to send seconds to
him, but of course it would come to nothing. Altogether everything was
supremely amusing and jolly. And, not letting his comrade enter into
further details of his position, Petritsky proceeded to tell him all
the interesting news. As he listened to Petritsky’s familiar stories in
the familiar setting of the rooms he had spent the last three years in,
Vronsky felt a delightful sense of coming back to the careless
Petersburg life that he was used to.

“Impossible!” he cried, letting down the pedal of the washing basin in
which he had been sousing his healthy red neck. “Impossible!” he cried,
at the news that Laura had flung over Fertinghof and had made up to
Mileev. “And is he as stupid and pleased as ever? Well, and how’s
Buzulukov?”

“Oh, there is a tale about Buzulukov—simply lovely!” cried Petritsky.
“You know his weakness for balls, and he never misses a single court
ball. He went to a big ball in a new helmet. Have you seen the new
helmets? Very nice, lighter. Well, so he’s standing.... No, I say, do
listen.”

“I am listening,” answered Vronsky, rubbing himself with a rough towel.

“Up comes the Grand Duchess with some ambassador or other, and, as
ill-luck would have it, she begins talking to him about the new
helmets. The Grand Duchess positively wanted to show the new helmet to
the ambassador. They see our friend standing there.” (Petritsky
mimicked how he was standing with the helmet.) “The Grand Duchess asked
him to give her the helmet; he doesn’t give it to her. What do you
think of that? Well, everyone’s winking at him, nodding, frowning—give
it to her, do! He doesn’t give it to her. He’s mute as a fish. Only
picture it!... Well, the ... what’s his name, whatever he was ... tries
to take the helmet from him ... he won’t give it up!... He pulls it
from him, and hands it to the Grand Duchess. ‘Here, your Highness,’
says he, ‘is the new helmet.’ She turned the helmet the other side up,
And—just picture it!—plop went a pear and sweetmeats out of it, two
pounds of sweetmeats!... He’d been storing them up, the darling!”

Vronsky burst into roars of laughter. And long afterwards, when he was
talking of other things, he broke out into his healthy laugh, showing
his strong, close rows of teeth, when he thought of the helmet.

Having heard all the news, Vronsky, with the assistance of his valet,
got into his uniform, and went off to report himself. He intended, when
he had done that, to drive to his brother’s and to Betsy’s and to pay
several visits with a view to beginning to go into that society where
he might meet Madame Karenina. As he always did in Petersburg, he left
home not meaning to return till late at night.






PART TWO


Chapter 1

At the end of the winter, in the Shtcherbatskys’ house, a consultation
was being held, which was to pronounce on the state of Kitty’s health
and the measures to be taken to restore her failing strength. She had
been ill, and as spring came on she grew worse. The family doctor gave
her cod liver oil, then iron, then nitrate of silver, but as the first
and the second and the third were alike in doing no good, and as his
advice when spring came was to go abroad, a celebrated physician was
called in. The celebrated physician, a very handsome man, still
youngish, asked to examine the patient. He maintained, with peculiar
satisfaction, it seemed, that maiden modesty is a mere relic of
barbarism, and that nothing could be more natural than for a man still
youngish to handle a young girl naked. He thought it natural because he
did it every day, and felt and thought, as it seemed to him, no harm as
he did it and consequently he considered modesty in the girl not merely
as a relic of barbarism, but also as an insult to himself.

There was nothing for it but to submit, since, although all the doctors
had studied in the same school, had read the same books, and learned
the same science, and though some people said this celebrated doctor
was a bad doctor, in the princess’s household and circle it was for
some reason accepted that this celebrated doctor alone had some special
knowledge, and that he alone could save Kitty. After a careful
examination and sounding of the bewildered patient, dazed with shame,
the celebrated doctor, having scrupulously washed his hands, was
standing in the drawing-room talking to the prince. The prince frowned
and coughed, listening to the doctor. As a man who had seen something
of life, and neither a fool nor an invalid, he had no faith in
medicine, and in his heart was furious at the whole farce, specially as
he was perhaps the only one who fully comprehended the cause of Kitty’s
illness. “Conceited blockhead!” he thought, as he listened to the
celebrated doctor’s chatter about his daughter’s symptoms. The doctor
was meantime with difficulty restraining the expression of his contempt
for this old gentleman, and with difficulty condescending to the level
of his intelligence. He perceived that it was no good talking to the
old man, and that the principal person in the house was the mother.
Before her he decided to scatter his pearls. At that instant the
princess came into the drawing-room with the family doctor. The prince
withdrew, trying not to show how ridiculous he thought the whole
performance. The princess was distracted, and did not know what to do.
She felt she had sinned against Kitty.

“Well, doctor, decide our fate,” said the princess. “Tell me
everything.”

“Is there hope?” she meant to say, but her lips quivered, and she could
not utter the question. “Well, doctor?”

“Immediately, princess. I will talk it over with my colleague, and then
I will have the honor of laying my opinion before you.”

“So we had better leave you?”

“As you please.”

The princess went out with a sigh.

When the doctors were left alone, the family doctor began timidly
explaining his opinion, that there was a commencement of tuberculous
trouble, but ... and so on. The celebrated doctor listened to him, and
in the middle of his sentence looked at his big gold watch.

“Yes,” said he. “But....”

The family doctor respectfully ceased in the middle of his
observations.

“The commencement of the tuberculous process we are not, as you are
aware, able to define; till there are cavities, there is nothing
definite. But we may suspect it. And there are indications;
malnutrition, nervous excitability, and so on. The question stands
thus: in presence of indications of tuberculous process, what is to be
done to maintain nutrition?”

“But, you know, there are always moral, spiritual causes at the back in
these cases,” the family doctor permitted himself to interpolate with a
subtle smile.

“Yes, that’s an understood thing,” responded the celebrated physician,
again glancing at his watch. “Beg pardon, is the Yausky bridge done
yet, or shall I have to drive around?” he asked. “Ah! it is. Oh, well,
then I can do it in twenty minutes. So we were saying the problem may
be put thus: to maintain nutrition and to give tone to the nerves. The
one is in close connection with the other, one must attack both sides
at once.”

“And how about a tour abroad?” asked the family doctor.

“I’ve no liking for foreign tours. And take note: if there is an early
stage of tuberculous process, of which we cannot be certain, a foreign
tour will be of no use. What is wanted is means of improving nutrition,
and not for lowering it.” And the celebrated doctor expounded his plan
of treatment with Soden waters, a remedy obviously prescribed primarily
on the ground that they could do no harm.

The family doctor listened attentively and respectfully.

“But in favor of foreign travel I would urge the change of habits, the
removal from conditions calling up reminiscences. And then the mother
wishes it,” he added.

“Ah! Well, in that case, to be sure, let them go. Only, those German
quacks are mischievous.... They ought to be persuaded.... Well, let
them go then.”

He glanced once more at his watch.

“Oh! time’s up already,” And he went to the door. The celebrated doctor
announced to the princess (a feeling of what was due from him dictated
his doing so) that he ought to see the patient once more.

“What! another examination!” cried the mother, with horror.

“Oh, no, only a few details, princess.”

“Come this way.”

And the mother, accompanied by the doctor, went into the drawing-room
to Kitty. Wasted and flushed, with a peculiar glitter in her eyes, left
there by the agony of shame she had been put through, Kitty stood in
the middle of the room. When the doctor came in she flushed crimson,
and her eyes filled with tears. All her illness and treatment struck
her as a thing so stupid, ludicrous even! Doctoring her seemed to her
as absurd as putting together the pieces of a broken vase. Her heart
was broken. Why would they try to cure her with pills and powders? But
she could not grieve her mother, especially as her mother considered
herself to blame.

“May I trouble you to sit down, princess?” the celebrated doctor said
to her.

He sat down with a smile, facing her, felt her pulse, and again began
asking her tiresome questions. She answered him, and all at once got
up, furious.

“Excuse me, doctor, but there is really no object in this. This is the
third time you’ve asked me the same thing.”

The celebrated doctor did not take offense.

“Nervous irritability,” he said to the princess, when Kitty had left
the room. “However, I had finished....”

And the doctor began scientifically explaining to the princess, as an
exceptionally intelligent woman, the condition of the young princess,
and concluded by insisting on the drinking of the waters, which were
certainly harmless. At the question: Should they go abroad? the doctor
plunged into deep meditation, as though resolving a weighty problem.
Finally his decision was pronounced: they were to go abroad, but to put
no faith in foreign quacks, and to apply to him in any need.

It seemed as though some piece of good fortune had come to pass after
the doctor had gone. The mother was much more cheerful when she went
back to her daughter, and Kitty pretended to be more cheerful. She had
often, almost always, to be pretending now.

“Really, I’m quite well, mamma. But if you want to go abroad, let’s
go!” she said, and trying to appear interested in the proposed tour,
she began talking of the preparations for the journey.


Chapter 2

Soon after the doctor, Dolly had arrived. She knew that there was to be
a consultation that day, and though she was only just up after her
confinement (she had another baby, a little girl, born at the end of
the winter), though she had trouble and anxiety enough of her own, she
had left her tiny baby and a sick child, to come and hear Kitty’s fate,
which was to be decided that day.

“Well, well?” she said, coming into the drawing-room, without taking
off her hat. “You’re all in good spirits. Good news, then?”

They tried to tell her what the doctor had said, but it appeared that
though the doctor had talked distinctly enough and at great length, it
was utterly impossible to report what he had said. The only point of
interest was that it was settled they should go abroad.

Dolly could not help sighing. Her dearest friend, her sister, was going
away. And her life was not a cheerful one. Her relations with Stepan
Arkadyevitch after their reconciliation had become humiliating. The
union Anna had cemented turned out to be of no solid character, and
family harmony was breaking down again at the same point. There had
been nothing definite, but Stepan Arkadyevitch was hardly ever at home;
money, too, was hardly ever forthcoming, and Dolly was continually
tortured by suspicions of infidelity, which she tried to dismiss,
dreading the agonies of jealousy she had been through already. The
first onslaught of jealousy, once lived through, could never come back
again, and even the discovery of infidelities could never now affect
her as it had the first time. Such a discovery now would only mean
breaking up family habits, and she let herself be deceived, despising
him and still more herself, for the weakness. Besides this, the care of
her large family was a constant worry to her: first, the nursing of her
young baby did not go well, then the nurse had gone away, now one of
the children had fallen ill.

“Well, how are all of you?” asked her mother.

“Ah, mamma, we have plenty of troubles of our own. Lili is ill, and I’m
afraid it’s scarlatina. I have come here now to hear about Kitty, and
then I shall shut myself up entirely, if—God forbid—it should be
scarlatina.”

The old prince too had come in from his study after the doctor’s
departure, and after presenting his cheek to Dolly, and saying a few
words to her, he turned to his wife:

“How have you settled it? you’re going? Well, and what do you mean to
do with me?”

“I suppose you had better stay here, Alexander,” said his wife.

“That’s as you like.”

“Mamma, why shouldn’t father come with us?” said Kitty. “It would be
nicer for him and for us too.”

The old prince got up and stroked Kitty’s hair. She lifted her head and
looked at him with a forced smile. It always seemed to her that he
understood her better than anyone in the family, though he did not say
much about her. Being the youngest, she was her father’s favorite, and
she fancied that his love gave him insight. When now her glance met his
blue kindly eyes looking intently at her, it seemed to her that he saw
right through her, and understood all that was not good that was
passing within her. Reddening, she stretched out towards him expecting
a kiss, but he only patted her hair and said:

“These stupid chignons! There’s no getting at the real daughter. One
simply strokes the bristles of dead women. Well, Dolinka,” he turned to
his elder daughter, “what’s your young buck about, hey?”

“Nothing, father,” answered Dolly, understanding that her husband was
meant. “He’s always out; I scarcely ever see him,” she could not resist
adding with a sarcastic smile.

“Why, hasn’t he gone into the country yet—to see about selling that
forest?”

“No, he’s still getting ready for the journey.”

“Oh, that’s it!” said the prince. “And so am I to be getting ready for
a journey too? At your service,” he said to his wife, sitting down.
“And I tell you what, Katia,” he went on to his younger daughter, “you
must wake up one fine day and say to yourself: Why, I’m quite well, and
merry, and going out again with father for an early morning walk in the
frost. Hey?”

What her father said seemed simple enough, yet at these words Kitty
became confused and overcome like a detected criminal. “Yes, he sees it
all, he understands it all, and in these words he’s telling me that
though I’m ashamed, I must get over my shame.” She could not pluck up
spirit to make any answer. She tried to begin, and all at once burst
into tears, and rushed out of the room.

“See what comes of your jokes!” the princess pounced down on her
husband. “You’re always....” she began a string of reproaches.

The prince listened to the princess’s scolding rather a long while
without speaking, but his face was more and more frowning.

“She’s so much to be pitied, poor child, so much to be pitied, and you
don’t feel how it hurts her to hear the slightest reference to the
cause of it. Ah! to be so mistaken in people!” said the princess, and
by the change in her tone both Dolly and the prince knew she was
speaking of Vronsky. “I don’t know why there aren’t laws against such
base, dishonorable people.”

“Ah, I can’t bear to hear you!” said the prince gloomily, getting up
from his low chair, and seeming anxious to get away, yet stopping in
the doorway. “There are laws, madam, and since you’ve challenged me to
it, I’ll tell you who’s to blame for it all: you and you, you and
nobody else. Laws against such young gallants there have always been,
and there still are! Yes, if there has been nothing that ought not to
have been, old as I am, I’d have called him out to the barrier, the
young dandy. Yes, and now you physic her and call in these quacks.”

The prince apparently had plenty more to say, but as soon as the
princess heard his tone she subsided at once, and became penitent, as
she always did on serious occasions.

“Alexander, Alexander,” she whispered, moving to him and beginning to
weep.

As soon as she began to cry the prince too calmed down. He went up to
her.

“There, that’s enough, that’s enough! You’re wretched too, I know. It
can’t be helped. There’s no great harm done. God is merciful ...
thanks....” he said, not knowing what he was saying, as he responded to
the tearful kiss of the princess that he felt on his hand. And the
prince went out of the room.

Before this, as soon as Kitty went out of the room in tears, Dolly,
with her motherly, family instincts, had promptly perceived that here a
woman’s work lay before her, and she prepared to do it. She took off
her hat, and, morally speaking, tucked up her sleeves and prepared for
action. While her mother was attacking her father, she tried to
restrain her mother, so far as filial reverence would allow. During the
prince’s outburst she was silent; she felt ashamed for her mother, and
tender towards her father for so quickly being kind again. But when her
father left them she made ready for what was the chief thing needful—to
go to Kitty and console her.

“I’d been meaning to tell you something for a long while, mamma: did
you know that Levin meant to make Kitty an offer when he was here the
last time? He told Stiva so.”

“Well, what then? I don’t understand....”

“So did Kitty perhaps refuse him?... She didn’t tell you so?”

“No, she has said nothing to me either of one or the other; she’s too
proud. But I know it’s all on account of the other.”

“Yes, but suppose she has refused Levin, and she wouldn’t have refused
him if it hadn’t been for the other, I know. And then, he has deceived
her so horribly.”

It was too terrible for the princess to think how she had sinned
against her daughter, and she broke out angrily.

“Oh, I really don’t understand! Nowadays they will all go their own
way, and mothers haven’t a word to say in anything, and then....”

“Mamma, I’ll go up to her.”

“Well, do. Did I tell you not to?” said her mother.


Chapter 3

When she went into Kitty’s little room, a pretty, pink little room,
full of knick-knacks in _vieux saxe,_ as fresh, and pink, and white,
and gay as Kitty herself had been two months ago, Dolly remembered how
they had decorated the room the year before together, with what love
and gaiety. Her heart turned cold when she saw Kitty sitting on a low
chair near the door, her eyes fixed immovably on a corner of the rug.
Kitty glanced at her sister, and the cold, rather ill-tempered
expression of her face did not change.

“I’m just going now, and I shall have to keep in and you won’t be able
to come to see me,” said Dolly, sitting down beside her. “I want to
talk to you.”

“What about?” Kitty asked swiftly, lifting her head in dismay.

“What should it be, but your trouble?”

“I have no trouble.”

“Nonsense, Kitty. Do you suppose I could help knowing? I know all about
it. And believe me, it’s of so little consequence.... We’ve all been
through it.”

Kitty did not speak, and her face had a stern expression.

“He’s not worth your grieving over him,” pursued Darya Alexandrovna,
coming straight to the point.

“No, because he has treated me with contempt,” said Kitty, in a
breaking voice. “Don’t talk of it! Please, don’t talk of it!”

“But who can have told you so? No one has said that. I’m certain he was
in love with you, and would still be in love with you, if it
hadn’t....”

“Oh, the most awful thing of all for me is this sympathizing!” shrieked
Kitty, suddenly flying into a passion. She turned round on her chair,
flushed crimson, and rapidly moving her fingers, pinched the clasp of
her belt first with one hand and then with the other. Dolly knew this
trick her sister had of clenching her hands when she was much excited;
she knew, too, that in moments of excitement Kitty was capable of
forgetting herself and saying a great deal too much, and Dolly would
have soothed her, but it was too late.

“What, what is it you want to make me feel, eh?” said Kitty quickly.
“That I’ve been in love with a man who didn’t care a straw for me, and
that I’m dying of love for him? And this is said to me by my own
sister, who imagines that ... that ... that she’s sympathizing with
me!... I don’t want these condolences and humbug!”

“Kitty, you’re unjust.”

“Why are you tormenting me?”

“But I ... quite the contrary ... I see you’re unhappy....”

But Kitty in her fury did not hear her.

“I’ve nothing to grieve over and be comforted about. I am too proud
ever to allow myself to care for a man who does not love me.”

“Yes, I don’t say so either.... Only one thing. Tell me the truth,”
said Darya Alexandrovna, taking her by the hand: “tell me, did Levin
speak to you?...”

The mention of Levin’s name seemed to deprive Kitty of the last vestige
of self-control. She leaped up from her chair, and flinging her clasp
on the ground, she gesticulated rapidly with her hands and said:

“Why bring Levin in too? I can’t understand what you want to torment me
for. I’ve told you, and I say it again, that I have some pride, and
never, _never_ would I do as you’re doing—go back to a man who’s
deceived you, who has cared for another woman. I can’t understand it!
You may, but I can’t!”

And saying these words she glanced at her sister, and seeing that Dolly
sat silent, her head mournfully bowed, Kitty, instead of running out of
the room as she had meant to do, sat down near the door, and hid her
face in her handkerchief.

The silence lasted for two minutes: Dolly was thinking of herself. That
humiliation of which she was always conscious came back to her with a
peculiar bitterness when her sister reminded her of it. She had not
looked for such cruelty in her sister, and she was angry with her. But
suddenly she heard the rustle of a skirt, and with it the sound of
heart-rending, smothered sobbing, and felt arms about her neck. Kitty
was on her knees before her.

“Dolinka, I am so, so wretched!” she whispered penitently. And the
sweet face covered with tears hid itself in Darya Alexandrovna’s skirt.

As though tears were the indispensable oil, without which the machinery
of mutual confidence could not run smoothly between the two sisters,
the sisters after their tears talked, not of what was uppermost in
their minds, but, though they talked of outside matters, they
understood each other. Kitty knew that the words she had uttered in
anger about her husband’s infidelity and her humiliating position had
cut her poor sister to the heart, but that she had forgiven her. Dolly
for her part knew all she had wanted to find out. She felt certain that
her surmises were correct; that Kitty’s misery, her inconsolable
misery, was due precisely to the fact that Levin had made her an offer
and she had refused him, and Vronsky had deceived her, and that she was
fully prepared to love Levin and to detest Vronsky. Kitty said not a
word of that; she talked of nothing but her spiritual condition.

“I have nothing to make me miserable,” she said, getting calmer; “but
can you understand that everything has become hateful, loathsome,
coarse to me, and I myself most of all? You can’t imagine what
loathsome thoughts I have about everything.”

“Why, whatever loathsome thoughts can you have?” asked Dolly, smiling.

“The most utterly loathsome and coarse: I can’t tell you. It’s not
unhappiness, or low spirits, but much worse. As though everything that
was good in me was all hidden away, and nothing was left but the most
loathsome. Come, how am I to tell you?” she went on, seeing the puzzled
look in her sister’s eyes. “Father began saying something to me just
now.... It seems to me he thinks all I want is to be married. Mother
takes me to a ball: it seems to me she only takes me to get me married
off as soon as may be, and be rid of me. I know it’s not the truth, but
I can’t drive away such thoughts. Eligible suitors, as they call them—I
can’t bear to see them. It seems to me they’re taking stock of me and
summing me up. In old days to go anywhere in a ball dress was a simple
joy to me, I admired myself; now I feel ashamed and awkward. And then!
The doctor.... Then....” Kitty hesitated; she wanted to say further
that ever since this change had taken place in her, Stepan Arkadyevitch
had become insufferably repulsive to her, and that she could not see
him without the grossest and most hideous conceptions rising before her
imagination.

“Oh, well, everything presents itself to me, in the coarsest, most
loathsome light,” she went on. “That’s my illness. Perhaps it will pass
off.”

“But you mustn’t think about it.”

“I can’t help it. I’m never happy except with the children at your
house.”

“What a pity you can’t be with me!”

“Oh, yes, I’m coming. I’ve had scarlatina, and I’ll persuade mamma to
let me.”

Kitty insisted on having her way, and went to stay at her sister’s and
nursed the children all through the scarlatina, for scarlatina it
turned out to be. The two sisters brought all the six children
successfully through it, but Kitty was no better in health, and in Lent
the Shtcherbatskys went abroad.


Chapter 4

The highest Petersburg society is essentially one: in it everyone knows
everyone else, everyone even visits everyone else. But this great set
has its subdivisions. Anna Arkadyevna Karenina had friends and close
ties in three different circles of this highest society. One circle was
her husband’s government official set, consisting of his colleagues and
subordinates, brought together in the most various and capricious
manner, and belonging to different social strata. Anna found it
difficult now to recall the feeling of almost awe-stricken reverence
which she had at first entertained for these persons. Now she knew all
of them as people know one another in a country town; she knew their
habits and weaknesses, and where the shoe pinched each one of them. She
knew their relations with one another and with the head authorities,
knew who was for whom, and how each one maintained his position, and
where they agreed and disagreed. But the circle of political, masculine
interests had never interested her, in spite of countess Lidia
Ivanovna’s influence, and she avoided it.

Another little set with which Anna was in close relations was the one
by means of which Alexey Alexandrovitch had made his career. The center
of this circle was the Countess Lidia Ivanovna. It was a set made up of
elderly, ugly, benevolent, and godly women, and clever, learned, and
ambitious men. One of the clever people belonging to the set had called
it “the conscience of Petersburg society.” Alexey Alexandrovitch had
the highest esteem for this circle, and Anna with her special gift for
getting on with everyone, had in the early days of her life in
Petersburg made friends in this circle also. Now, since her return from
Moscow, she had come to feel this set insufferable. It seemed to her
that both she and all of them were insincere, and she felt so bored and
ill at ease in that world that she went to see the Countess Lidia
Ivanovna as little as possible.

The third circle with which Anna had ties was preeminently the
fashionable world—the world of balls, of dinners, of sumptuous dresses,
the world that hung on to the court with one hand, so as to avoid
sinking to the level of the demi-monde. For the demi-monde the members
of that fashionable world believed that they despised, though their
tastes were not merely similar, but in fact identical. Her connection
with this circle was kept up through Princess Betsy Tverskaya, her
cousin’s wife, who had an income of a hundred and twenty thousand
roubles, and who had taken a great fancy to Anna ever since she first
came out, showed her much attention, and drew her into her set, making
fun of Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s coterie.

“When I’m old and ugly I’ll be the same,” Betsy used to say; “but for a
pretty young woman like you it’s early days for that house of charity.”

Anna had at first avoided as far as she could Princess Tverskaya’s
world, because it necessitated an expenditure beyond her means, and
besides in her heart she preferred the first circle. But since her
visit to Moscow she had done quite the contrary. She avoided her
serious-minded friends, and went out into the fashionable world. There
she met Vronsky, and experienced an agitating joy at those meetings.
She met Vronsky specially often at Betsy’s for Betsy was a Vronsky by
birth and his cousin. Vronsky was everywhere where he had any chance of
meeting Anna, and speaking to her, when he could, of his love. She gave
him no encouragement, but every time she met him there surged up in her
heart that same feeling of quickened life that had come upon her that
day in the railway carriage when she saw him for the first time. She
was conscious herself that her delight sparkled in her eyes and curved
her lips into a smile, and she could not quench the expression of this
delight.

At first Anna sincerely believed that she was displeased with him for
daring to pursue her. Soon after her return from Moscow, on arriving at
a _soirée_ where she had expected to meet him, and not finding him
there, she realized distinctly from the rush of disappointment that she
had been deceiving herself, and that this pursuit was not merely not
distasteful to her, but that it made the whole interest of her life.



The celebrated singer was singing for the second time, and all the
fashionable world was in the theater. Vronsky, seeing his cousin from
his stall in the front row, did not wait till the _entr’acte_, but went
to her box.

“Why didn’t you come to dinner?” she said to him. “I marvel at the
second sight of lovers,” she added with a smile, so that no one but he
could hear; “_she wasn’t there_. But come after the opera.”

Vronsky looked inquiringly at her. She nodded. He thanked her by a
smile, and sat down beside her.

“But how I remember your jeers!” continued Princess Betsy, who took a
peculiar pleasure in following up this passion to a successful issue.
“What’s become of all that? You’re caught, my dear boy.”

“That’s my one desire, to be caught,” answered Vronsky, with his
serene, good-humored smile. “If I complain of anything it’s only that
I’m not caught enough, to tell the truth. I begin to lose hope.”

“Why, whatever hope can you have?” said Betsy, offended on behalf of
her friend. “_Entendons nous...._” But in her eyes there were gleams of
light that betrayed that she understood perfectly and precisely as he
did what hope he might have.

“None whatever,” said Vronsky, laughing and showing his even rows of
teeth. “Excuse me,” he added, taking an opera-glass out of her hand,
and proceeding to scrutinize, over her bare shoulder, the row of boxes
facing them. “I’m afraid I’m becoming ridiculous.”

He was very well aware that he ran no risk of being ridiculous in the
eyes of Betsy or any other fashionable people. He was very well aware
that in their eyes the position of an unsuccessful lover of a girl, or
of any woman free to marry, might be ridiculous. But the position of a
man pursuing a married woman, and, regardless of everything, staking
his life on drawing her into adultery, has something fine and grand
about it, and can never be ridiculous; and so it was with a proud and
gay smile under his mustaches that he lowered the opera-glass and
looked at his cousin.

“But why was it you didn’t come to dinner?” she said, admiring him.

“I must tell you about that. I was busily employed, and doing what, do
you suppose? I’ll give you a hundred guesses, a thousand ... you’d
never guess. I’ve been reconciling a husband with a man who’d insulted
his wife. Yes, really!”

“Well, did you succeed?”

“Almost.”

“You really must tell me about it,” she said, getting up. “Come to me
in the next _entr’acte._”

“I can’t; I’m going to the French theater.”

“From Nilsson?” Betsy queried in horror, though she could not herself
have distinguished Nilsson’s voice from any chorus girl’s.

“Can’t help it. I’ve an appointment there, all to do with my mission of
peace.”

“‘Blessed are the peacemakers; theirs is the kingdom of heaven,’” said
Betsy, vaguely recollecting she had heard some similar saying from
someone. “Very well, then, sit down, and tell me what it’s all about.”

And she sat down again.


Chapter 5

“This is rather indiscreet, but it’s so good it’s an awful temptation
to tell the story,” said Vronsky, looking at her with his laughing
eyes. “I’m not going to mention any names.”

“But I shall guess, so much the better.”

“Well, listen: two festive young men were driving—”

“Officers of your regiment, of course?”

“I didn’t say they were officers,—two young men who had been lunching.”

“In other words, drinking.”

“Possibly. They were driving on their way to dinner with a friend in
the most festive state of mind. And they beheld a pretty woman in a
hired sledge; she overtakes them, looks round at them, and, so they
fancy anyway, nods to them and laughs. They, of course, follow her.
They gallop at full speed. To their amazement, the fair one alights at
the entrance of the very house to which they were going. The fair one
darts upstairs to the top story. They get a glimpse of red lips under a
short veil, and exquisite little feet.”

“You describe it with such feeling that I fancy you must be one of the
two.”

“And after what you said, just now! Well, the young men go in to their
comrade’s; he was giving a farewell dinner. There they certainly did
drink a little too much, as one always does at farewell dinners. And at
dinner they inquire who lives at the top in that house. No one knows;
only their host’s valet, in answer to their inquiry whether any ‘young
ladies’ are living on the top floor, answered that there were a great
many of them about there. After dinner the two young men go into their
host’s study, and write a letter to the unknown fair one. They compose
an ardent epistle, a declaration in fact, and they carry the letter
upstairs themselves, so as to elucidate whatever might appear not
perfectly intelligible in the letter.”

“Why are you telling me these horrible stories? Well?”

“They ring. A maid-servant opens the door, they hand her the letter,
and assure the maid that they’re both so in love that they’ll die on
the spot at the door. The maid, stupefied, carries in their messages.
All at once a gentleman appears with whiskers like sausages, as red as
a lobster, announces that there is no one living in the flat except his
wife, and sends them both about their business.”

“How do you know he had whiskers like sausages, as you say?”

“Ah, you shall hear. I’ve just been to make peace between them.”

“Well, and what then?”

“That’s the most interesting part of the story. It appears that it’s a
happy couple, a government clerk and his lady. The government clerk
lodges a complaint, and I became a mediator, and such a mediator!... I
assure you Talleyrand couldn’t hold a candle to me.”

“Why, where was the difficulty?”

“Ah, you shall hear.... We apologize in due form: we are in despair, we
entreat forgiveness for the unfortunate misunderstanding. The
government clerk with the sausages begins to melt, but he, too, desires
to express his sentiments, and as soon as ever he begins to express
them, he begins to get hot and say nasty things, and again I’m obliged
to trot out all my diplomatic talents. I allowed that their conduct was
bad, but I urged him to take into consideration their heedlessness,
their youth; then, too, the young men had only just been lunching
together. ‘You understand. They regret it deeply, and beg you to
overlook their misbehavior.’ The government clerk was softened once
more. ‘I consent, count, and am ready to overlook it; but you perceive
that my wife—my wife’s a respectable woman—has been exposed to the
persecution, and insults, and effrontery of young upstarts,
scoundrels....’ And you must understand, the young upstarts are present
all the while, and I have to keep the peace between them. Again I call
out all my diplomacy, and again as soon as the thing was about at an
end, our friend the government clerk gets hot and red, and his sausages
stand on end with wrath, and once more I launch out into diplomatic
wiles.”

“Ah, he must tell you this story!” said Betsy, laughing, to a lady who
came into her box. “He has been making me laugh so.”

“Well, _bonne chance_!” she added, giving Vronsky one finger of the
hand in which she held her fan, and with a shrug of her shoulders she
twitched down the bodice of her gown that had worked up, so as to be
duly naked as she moved forward towards the footlights into the light
of the gas, and the sight of all eyes.

Vronsky drove to the French theater, where he really had to see the
colonel of his regiment, who never missed a single performance there.
He wanted to see him, to report on the result of his mediation, which
had occupied and amused him for the last three days. Petritsky, whom he
liked, was implicated in the affair, and the other culprit was a
capital fellow and first-rate comrade, who had lately joined the
regiment, the young Prince Kedrov. And what was most important, the
interests of the regiment were involved in it too.

Both the young men were in Vronsky’s company. The colonel of the
regiment was waited upon by the government clerk, Venden, with a
complaint against his officers, who had insulted his wife. His young
wife, so Venden told the story—he had been married half a year—was at
church with her mother, and suddenly overcome by indisposition, arising
from her interesting condition, she could not remain standing, she
drove home in the first sledge, a smart-looking one, she came across.
On the spot the officers set off in pursuit of her; she was alarmed,
and feeling still more unwell, ran up the staircase home. Venden
himself, on returning from his office, heard a ring at their bell and
voices, went out, and seeing the intoxicated officers with a letter, he
had turned them out. He asked for exemplary punishment.

“Yes, it’s all very well,” said the colonel to Vronsky, whom he had
invited to come and see him. “Petritsky’s becoming impossible. Not a
week goes by without some scandal. This government clerk won’t let it
drop, he’ll go on with the thing.”

Vronsky saw all the thanklessness of the business, and that there could
be no question of a duel in it, that everything must be done to soften
the government clerk, and hush the matter up. The colonel had called in
Vronsky just because he knew him to be an honorable and intelligent
man, and, more than all, a man who cared for the honor of the regiment.
They talked it over, and decided that Petritsky and Kedrov must go with
Vronsky to Venden’s to apologize. The colonel and Vronsky were both
fully aware that Vronsky’s name and rank would be sure to contribute
greatly to the softening of the injured husband’s feelings.

And these two influences were not in fact without effect; though the
result remained, as Vronsky had described, uncertain.

On reaching the French theater, Vronsky retired to the foyer with the
colonel, and reported to him his success, or non-success. The colonel,
thinking it all over, made up his mind not to pursue the matter
further, but then for his own satisfaction proceeded to cross-examine
Vronsky about his interview; and it was a long while before he could
restrain his laughter, as Vronsky described how the government clerk,
after subsiding for a while, would suddenly flare up again, as he
recalled the details, and how Vronsky, at the last half word of
conciliation, skillfully manœuvered a retreat, shoving Petritsky out
before him.

“It’s a disgraceful story, but killing. Kedrov really can’t fight the
gentleman! Was he so awfully hot?” he commented, laughing. “But what do
you say to Claire today? She’s marvelous,” he went on, speaking of a
new French actress. “However often you see her, every day she’s
different. It’s only the French who can do that.”


Chapter 6

Princess Betsy drove home from the theater, without waiting for the end
of the last act. She had only just time to go into her dressing-room,
sprinkle her long, pale face with powder, rub it, set her dress to
rights, and order tea in the big drawing-room, when one after another
carriages drove up to her huge house in Bolshaia Morskaia. Her guests
stepped out at the wide entrance, and the stout porter, who used to
read the newspapers in the mornings behind the glass door, to the
edification of the passers-by, noiselessly opened the immense door,
letting the visitors pass by him into the house.

Almost at the same instant the hostess, with freshly arranged coiffure
and freshened face, walked in at one door and her guests at the other
door of the drawing-room, a large room with dark walls, downy rugs, and
a brightly lighted table, gleaming with the light of candles, white
cloth, silver samovar, and transparent china tea-things.

The hostess sat down at the table and took off her gloves. Chairs were
set with the aid of footmen, moving almost imperceptibly about the
room; the party settled itself, divided into two groups: one round the
samovar near the hostess, the other at the opposite end of the
drawing-room, round the handsome wife of an ambassador, in black
velvet, with sharply defined black eyebrows. In both groups
conversation wavered, as it always does, for the first few minutes,
broken up by meetings, greetings, offers of tea, and as it were,
feeling about for something to rest upon.

“She’s exceptionally good as an actress; one can see she’s studied
Kaulbach,” said a diplomatic attaché in the group round the
ambassador’s wife. “Did you notice how she fell down?...”

“Oh, please, don’t let us talk about Nilsson! No one can possibly say
anything new about her,” said a fat, red-faced, flaxen-headed lady,
without eyebrows and chignon, wearing an old silk dress. This was
Princess Myakaya, noted for her simplicity and the roughness of her
manners, and nicknamed _enfant terrible_. Princess Myakaya, sitting in
the middle between the two groups, and listening to both, took part in
the conversation first of one and then of the other. “Three people have
used that very phrase about Kaulbach to me today already, just as
though they had made a compact about it. And I can’t see why they liked
that remark so.”

The conversation was cut short by this observation, and a new subject
had to be thought of again.

“Do tell me something amusing but not spiteful,” said the ambassador’s
wife, a great proficient in the art of that elegant conversation called
by the English _small talk_. She addressed the attaché, who was at a
loss now what to begin upon.

“They say that that’s a difficult task, that nothing’s amusing that
isn’t spiteful,” he began with a smile. “But I’ll try. Get me a
subject. It all lies in the subject. If a subject’s given me, it’s easy
to spin something round it. I often think that the celebrated talkers
of the last century would have found it difficult to talk cleverly now.
Everything clever is so stale....”

“That has been said long ago,” the ambassador’s wife interrupted him,
laughing.

The conversation began amiably, but just because it was too amiable, it
came to a stop again. They had to have recourse to the sure,
never-failing topic—gossip.

“Don’t you think there’s something Louis Quinze about Tushkevitch?” he
said, glancing towards a handsome, fair-haired young man, standing at
the table.

“Oh, yes! He’s in the same style as the drawing-room and that’s why it
is he’s so often here.”

This conversation was maintained, since it rested on allusions to what
could not be talked of in that room—that is to say, of the relations of
Tushkevitch with their hostess.

Round the samovar and the hostess the conversation had been meanwhile
vacillating in just the same way between three inevitable topics: the
latest piece of public news, the theater, and scandal. It, too, came
finally to rest on the last topic, that is, ill-natured gossip.

“Have you heard the Maltishtcheva woman—the mother, not the
daughter—has ordered a costume in _diable rose_ color?”

“Nonsense! No, that’s too lovely!”

“I wonder that with her sense—for she’s not a fool, you know—that she
doesn’t see how funny she is.”

Everyone had something to say in censure or ridicule of the luckless
Madame Maltishtcheva, and the conversation crackled merrily, like a
burning faggot-stack.

The husband of Princess Betsy, a good-natured fat man, an ardent
collector of engravings, hearing that his wife had visitors, came into
the drawing-room before going to his club. Stepping noiselessly over
the thick rugs, he went up to Princess Myakaya.

“How did you like Nilsson?” he asked.

“Oh, how can you steal upon anyone like that! How you startled me!” she
responded. “Please don’t talk to me about the opera; you know nothing
about music. I’d better meet you on your own ground, and talk about
your majolica and engravings. Come now, what treasure have you been
buying lately at the old curiosity shops?”

“Would you like me to show you? But you don’t understand such things.”

“Oh, do show me! I’ve been learning about them at those—what’s their
names?... the bankers ... they’ve some splendid engravings. They showed
them to us.”

“Why, have you been at the Schützburgs?” asked the hostess from the
samovar.

“Yes, _ma chère_. They asked my husband and me to dinner, and told us
the sauce at that dinner cost a hundred pounds,” Princess Myakaya said,
speaking loudly, and conscious everyone was listening; “and very nasty
sauce it was, some green mess. We had to ask them, and I made them
sauce for eighteen pence, and everybody was very much pleased with it.
I can’t run to hundred-pound sauces.”

“She’s unique!” said the lady of the house.

“Marvelous!” said someone.

The sensation produced by Princess Myakaya’s speeches was always
unique, and the secret of the sensation she produced lay in the fact
that though she spoke not always appropriately, as now, she said simple
things with some sense in them. In the society in which she lived such
plain statements produced the effect of the wittiest epigram. Princess
Myakaya could never see why it had that effect, but she knew it had,
and took advantage of it.

As everyone had been listening while Princess Myakaya spoke, and so the
conversation around the ambassador’s wife had dropped, Princess Betsy
tried to bring the whole party together, and turned to the ambassador’s
wife.

“Will you really not have tea? You should come over here by us.”

“No, we’re very happy here,” the ambassador’s wife responded with a
smile, and she went on with the conversation that had been begun.

It was a very agreeable conversation. They were criticizing the
Karenins, husband and wife.

“Anna is quite changed since her stay in Moscow. There’s something
strange about her,” said her friend.

“The great change is that she brought back with her the shadow of
Alexey Vronsky,” said the ambassador’s wife.

“Well, what of it? There’s a fable of Grimm’s about a man without a
shadow, a man who’s lost his shadow. And that’s his punishment for
something. I never could understand how it was a punishment. But a
woman must dislike being without a shadow.”

“Yes, but women with a shadow usually come to a bad end,” said Anna’s
friend.

“Bad luck to your tongue!” said Princess Myakaya suddenly. “Madame
Karenina’s a splendid woman. I don’t like her husband, but I like her
very much.”

“Why don’t you like her husband? He’s such a remarkable man,” said the
ambassador’s wife. “My husband says there are few statesmen like him in
Europe.”

“And my husband tells me just the same, but I don’t believe it,” said
Princess Myakaya. “If our husbands didn’t talk to us, we should see the
facts as they are. Alexey Alexandrovitch, to my thinking, is simply a
fool. I say it in a whisper ... but doesn’t it really make everything
clear? Before, when I was told to consider him clever, I kept looking
for his ability, and thought myself a fool for not seeing it; but
directly I said, _he’s a fool,_ though only in a whisper, everything’s
explained, isn’t it?”

“How spiteful you are today!”

“Not a bit. I’d no other way out of it. One of the two had to be a
fool. And, well, you know one can’t say that of oneself.”

“‘No one is satisfied with his fortune, and everyone is satisfied with
his wit.’” The attaché repeated the French saying.

“That’s just it, just it,” Princess Myakaya turned to him. “But the
point is that I won’t abandon Anna to your mercies. She’s so nice, so
charming. How can she help it if they’re all in love with her, and
follow her about like shadows?”

“Oh, I had no idea of blaming her for it,” Anna’s friend said in
self-defense.

“If no one follows us about like a shadow, that’s no proof that we’ve
any right to blame her.”

And having duly disposed of Anna’s friend, the Princess Myakaya got up,
and together with the ambassador’s wife, joined the group at the table,
where the conversation was dealing with the king of Prussia.

“What wicked gossip were you talking over there?” asked Betsy.

“About the Karenins. The princess gave us a sketch of Alexey
Alexandrovitch,” said the ambassador’s wife with a smile, as she sat
down at the table.

“Pity we didn’t hear it!” said Princess Betsy, glancing towards the
door. “Ah, here you are at last!” she said, turning with a smile to
Vronsky, as he came in.

Vronsky was not merely acquainted with all the persons whom he was
meeting here; he saw them all every day; and so he came in with the
quiet manner with which one enters a room full of people from whom one
has only just parted.

“Where do I come from?” he said, in answer to a question from the
ambassador’s wife. “Well, there’s no help for it, I must confess. From
the _opera bouffe_. I do believe I’ve seen it a hundred times, and
always with fresh enjoyment. It’s exquisite! I know it’s disgraceful,
but I go to sleep at the opera, and I sit out the _opera bouffe_ to the
last minute, and enjoy it. This evening....”

He mentioned a French actress, and was going to tell something about
her; but the ambassador’s wife, with playful horror, cut him short.

“Please don’t tell us about that horror.”

“All right, I won’t especially as everyone knows those horrors.”

“And we should all go to see them if it were accepted as the correct
thing, like the opera,” chimed in Princess Myakaya.


Chapter 7

Steps were heard at the door, and Princess Betsy, knowing it was Madame
Karenina, glanced at Vronsky. He was looking towards the door, and his
face wore a strange new expression. Joyfully, intently, and at the same
time timidly, he gazed at the approaching figure, and slowly he rose to
his feet. Anna walked into the drawing-room. Holding herself extremely
erect, as always, looking straight before her, and moving with her
swift, resolute, and light step, that distinguished her from all other
society women, she crossed the short space to her hostess, shook hands
with her, smiled, and with the same smile looked around at Vronsky.
Vronsky bowed low and pushed a chair up for her.

She acknowledged this only by a slight nod, flushed a little, and
frowned. But immediately, while rapidly greeting her acquaintances, and
shaking the hands proffered to her, she addressed Princess Betsy:

“I have been at Countess Lidia’s, and meant to have come here earlier,
but I stayed on. Sir John was there. He’s very interesting.”

“Oh, that’s this missionary?”

“Yes; he told us about the life in India, most interesting things.”

The conversation, interrupted by her coming in, flickered up again like
the light of a lamp being blown out.

“Sir John! Yes, Sir John; I’ve seen him. He speaks well. The Vlassieva
girl’s quite in love with him.”

“And is it true the younger Vlassieva girl’s to marry Topov?”

“Yes, they say it’s quite a settled thing.”

“I wonder at the parents! They say it’s a marriage for love.”

“For love? What antediluvian notions you have! Can one talk of love in
these days?” said the ambassador’s wife.

“What’s to be done? It’s a foolish old fashion that’s kept up still,”
said Vronsky.

“So much the worse for those who keep up the fashion. The only happy
marriages I know are marriages of prudence.”

“Yes, but then how often the happiness of these prudent marriages flies
away like dust just because that passion turns up that they have
refused to recognize,” said Vronsky.

“But by marriages of prudence we mean those in which both parties have
sown their wild oats already. That’s like scarlatina—one has to go
through it and get it over.”

“Then they ought to find out how to vaccinate for love, like smallpox.”

“I was in love in my young days with a deacon,” said the Princess
Myakaya. “I don’t know that it did me any good.”

“No; I imagine, joking apart, that to know love, one must make mistakes
and then correct them,” said Princess Betsy.

“Even after marriage?” said the ambassador’s wife playfully.

“‘It’s never too late to mend.’” The attaché repeated the English
proverb.

“Just so,” Betsy agreed; “one must make mistakes and correct them. What
do you think about it?” she turned to Anna, who, with a faintly
perceptible resolute smile on her lips, was listening in silence to the
conversation.

“I think,” said Anna, playing with the glove she had taken off, “I
think ... of so many men, so many minds, certainly so many hearts, so
many kinds of love.”

Vronsky was gazing at Anna, and with a fainting heart waiting for what
she would say. He sighed as after a danger escaped when she uttered
these words.

Anna suddenly turned to him.

“Oh, I have had a letter from Moscow. They write me that Kitty
Shtcherbatskaya’s very ill.”

“Really?” said Vronsky, knitting his brows.

Anna looked sternly at him.

“That doesn’t interest you?”

“On the contrary, it does, very much. What was it exactly they told
you, if I may know?” he questioned.

Anna got up and went to Betsy.

“Give me a cup of tea,” she said, standing at her table.

While Betsy was pouring out the tea, Vronsky went up to Anna.

“What is it they write to you?” he repeated.

“I often think men have no understanding of what’s not honorable though
they’re always talking of it,” said Anna, without answering him. “I’ve
wanted to tell you so a long while,” she added, and moving a few steps
away, she sat down at a table in a corner covered with albums.

“I don’t quite understand the meaning of your words,” he said, handing
her the cup.

She glanced towards the sofa beside her, and he instantly sat down.

“Yes, I have been wanting to tell you,” she said, not looking at him.
“You behaved wrongly, very wrongly.”

“Do you suppose I don’t know that I’ve acted wrongly? But who was the
cause of my doing so?”

“What do you say that to me for?” she said, glancing severely at him.

“You know what for,” he answered boldly and joyfully, meeting her
glance and not dropping his eyes.

Not he, but she, was confused.

“That only shows you have no heart,” she said. But her eyes said that
she knew he had a heart, and that was why she was afraid of him.

“What you spoke of just now was a mistake, and not love.”

“Remember that I have forbidden you to utter that word, that hateful
word,” said Anna, with a shudder. But at once she felt that by that
very word “forbidden” she had shown that she acknowledged certain
rights over him, and by that very fact was encouraging him to speak of
love. “I have long meant to tell you this,” she went on, looking
resolutely into his eyes, and hot all over from the burning flush on
her cheeks. “I’ve come on purpose this evening, knowing I should meet
you. I have come to tell you that this must end. I have never blushed
before anyone, and you force me to feel to blame for something.”

He looked at her and was struck by a new spiritual beauty in her face.

“What do you wish of me?” he said simply and seriously.

“I want you to go to Moscow and ask for Kitty’s forgiveness,” she said.

“You don’t wish that?” he said.

He saw she was saying what she forced herself to say, not what she
wanted to say.

“If you love me, as you say,” she whispered, “do so that I may be at
peace.”

His face grew radiant.

“Don’t you know that you’re all my life to me? But I know no peace, and
I can’t give it to you; all myself—and love ... yes. I can’t think of
you and myself apart. You and I are one to me. And I see no chance
before us of peace for me or for you. I see a chance of despair, of
wretchedness ... or I see a chance of bliss, what bliss!... Can it be
there’s no chance of it?” he murmured with his lips; but she heard.

She strained every effort of her mind to say what ought to be said. But
instead of that she let her eyes rest on him, full of love, and made no
answer.

“It’s come!” he thought in ecstasy. “When I was beginning to despair,
and it seemed there would be no end—it’s come! She loves me! She owns
it!”

“Then do this for me: never say such things to me, and let us be
friends,” she said in words; but her eyes spoke quite differently.

“Friends we shall never be, you know that yourself. Whether we shall be
the happiest or the wretchedest of people—that’s in your hands.”

She would have said something, but he interrupted her.

“I ask one thing only: I ask for the right to hope, to suffer as I do.
But if even that cannot be, command me to disappear, and I disappear.
You shall not see me if my presence is distasteful to you.”

“I don’t want to drive you away.”

“Only don’t change anything, leave everything as it is,” he said in a
shaky voice. “Here’s your husband.”

At that instant Alexey Alexandrovitch did in fact walk into the room
with his calm, awkward gait.

Glancing at his wife and Vronsky, he went up to the lady of the house,
and sitting down for a cup of tea, began talking in his deliberate,
always audible voice, in his habitual tone of banter, ridiculing
someone.

“Your Rambouillet is in full conclave,” he said, looking round at all
the party; “the graces and the muses.”

But Princess Betsy could not endure that tone of his—“sneering,” as she
called it, using the English word, and like a skillful hostess she at
once brought him into a serious conversation on the subject of
universal conscription. Alexey Alexandrovitch was immediately
interested in the subject, and began seriously defending the new
imperial decree against Princess Betsy, who had attacked it.

Vronsky and Anna still sat at the little table.

“This is getting indecorous,” whispered one lady, with an expressive
glance at Madame Karenina, Vronsky, and her husband.

“What did I tell you?” said Anna’s friend.

But not only those ladies, almost everyone in the room, even the
Princess Myakaya and Betsy herself, looked several times in the
direction of the two who had withdrawn from the general circle, as
though that were a disturbing fact. Alexey Alexandrovitch was the only
person who did not once look in that direction, and was not diverted
from the interesting discussion he had entered upon.

Noticing the disagreeable impression that was being made on everyone,
Princess Betsy slipped someone else into her place to listen to Alexey
Alexandrovitch, and went up to Anna.

“I’m always amazed at the clearness and precision of your husband’s
language,” she said. “The most transcendental ideas seem to be within
my grasp when he’s speaking.”

“Oh, yes!” said Anna, radiant with a smile of happiness, and not
understanding a word of what Betsy had said. She crossed over to the
big table and took part in the general conversation.

Alexey Alexandrovitch, after staying half an hour, went up to his wife
and suggested that they should go home together. But she answered, not
looking at him, that she was staying to supper. Alexey Alexandrovitch
made his bows and withdrew.

The fat old Tatar, Madame Karenina’s coachman, was with difficulty
holding one of her pair of grays, chilled with the cold and rearing at
the entrance. A footman stood opening the carriage door. The
hall-porter stood holding open the great door of the house. Anna
Arkadyevna, with her quick little hand, was unfastening the lace of her
sleeve, caught in the hook of her fur cloak, and with bent head
listening to the words Vronsky murmured as he escorted her down.

“You’ve said nothing, of course, and I ask nothing,” he was saying;
“but you know that friendship’s not what I want: that there’s only one
happiness in life for me, that word that you dislike so ... yes,
love!...”

“Love,” she repeated slowly, in an inner voice, and suddenly, at the
very instant she unhooked the lace, she added, “Why I don’t like the
word is that it means too much to me, far more than you can
understand,” and she glanced into his face. “_Au revoir!_”

She gave him her hand, and with her rapid, springy step she passed by
the porter and vanished into the carriage.

Her glance, the touch of her hand, set him aflame. He kissed the palm
of his hand where she had touched it, and went home, happy in the sense
that he had got nearer to the attainment of his aims that evening than
during the last two months.


Chapter 8

Alexey Alexandrovitch had seen nothing striking or improper in the fact
that his wife was sitting with Vronsky at a table apart, in eager
conversation with him about something. But he noticed that to the rest
of the party this appeared something striking and improper, and for
that reason it seemed to him too to be improper. He made up his mind
that he must speak of it to his wife.

On reaching home Alexey Alexandrovitch went to his study, as he usually
did, seated himself in his low chair, opened a book on the Papacy at
the place where he had laid the paper-knife in it, and read till one
o’clock, just as he usually did. But from time to time he rubbed his
high forehead and shook his head, as though to drive away something. At
his usual time he got up and made his toilet for the night. Anna
Arkadyevna had not yet come in. With a book under his arm he went
upstairs. But this evening, instead of his usual thoughts and
meditations upon official details, his thoughts were absorbed by his
wife and something disagreeable connected with her. Contrary to his
usual habit, he did not get into bed, but fell to walking up and down
the rooms with his hands clasped behind his back. He could not go to
bed, feeling that it was absolutely needful for him first to think
thoroughly over the position that had just arisen.

When Alexey Alexandrovitch had made up his mind that he must talk to
his wife about it, it had seemed a very easy and simple matter. But
now, when he began to think over the question that had just presented
itself, it seemed to him very complicated and difficult.

Alexey Alexandrovitch was not jealous. Jealousy according to his
notions was an insult to one’s wife, and one ought to have confidence
in one’s wife. Why one ought to have confidence—that is to say,
complete conviction that his young wife would always love him—he did
not ask himself. But he had no experience of lack of confidence,
because he had confidence in her, and told himself that he ought to
have it. Now, though his conviction that jealousy was a shameful
feeling and that one ought to feel confidence, had not broken down, he
felt that he was standing face to face with something illogical and
irrational, and did not know what was to be done. Alexey Alexandrovitch
was standing face to face with life, with the possibility of his wife’s
loving someone other than himself, and this seemed to him very
irrational and incomprehensible because it was life itself. All his
life Alexey Alexandrovitch had lived and worked in official spheres,
having to do with the reflection of life. And every time he had
stumbled against life itself he had shrunk away from it. Now he
experienced a feeling akin to that of a man who, while calmly crossing
a precipice by a bridge, should suddenly discover that the bridge is
broken, and that there is a chasm below. That chasm was life itself,
the bridge that artificial life in which Alexey Alexandrovitch had
lived. For the first time the question presented itself to him of the
possibility of his wife’s loving someone else, and he was horrified at
it.

He did not undress, but walked up and down with his regular tread over
the resounding parquet of the dining-room, where one lamp was burning,
over the carpet of the dark drawing-room, in which the light was
reflected on the big new portrait of himself hanging over the sofa, and
across her boudoir, where two candles burned, lighting up the portraits
of her parents and woman friends, and the pretty knick-knacks of her
writing-table, that he knew so well. He walked across her boudoir to
the bedroom door, and turned back again. At each turn in his walk,
especially at the parquet of the lighted dining-room, he halted and
said to himself, “Yes, this I must decide and put a stop to; I must
express my view of it and my decision.” And he turned back again. “But
express what—what decision?” he said to himself in the drawing-room,
and he found no reply. “But after all,” he asked himself before turning
into the boudoir, “what has occurred? Nothing. She was talking a long
while with him. But what of that? Surely women in society can talk to
whom they please. And then, jealousy means lowering both myself and
her,” he told himself as he went into her boudoir; but this dictum,
which had always had such weight with him before, had now no weight and
no meaning at all. And from the bedroom door he turned back again; but
as he entered the dark drawing-room some inner voice told him that it
was not so, and that if others noticed it that showed that there was
something. And he said to himself again in the dining-room, “Yes, I
must decide and put a stop to it, and express my view of it....” And
again at the turn in the drawing-room he asked himself, “Decide how?”
And again he asked himself, “What had occurred?” and answered,
“Nothing,” and recollected that jealousy was a feeling insulting to his
wife; but again in the drawing-room he was convinced that something had
happened. His thoughts, like his body, went round a complete circle,
without coming upon anything new. He noticed this, rubbed his forehead,
and sat down in her boudoir.

There, looking at her table, with the malachite blotting case lying at
the top and an unfinished letter, his thoughts suddenly changed. He
began to think of her, of what she was thinking and feeling. For the
first time he pictured vividly to himself her personal life, her ideas,
her desires, and the idea that she could and should have a separate
life of her own seemed to him so alarming that he made haste to dispel
it. It was the chasm which he was afraid to peep into. To put himself
in thought and feeling in another person’s place was a spiritual
exercise not natural to Alexey Alexandrovitch. He looked on this
spiritual exercise as a harmful and dangerous abuse of the fancy.

“And the worst of it all,” thought he, “is that just now, at the very
moment when my great work is approaching completion” (he was thinking
of the project he was bringing forward at the time), “when I stand in
need of all my mental peace and all my energies, just now this stupid
worry should fall foul of me. But what’s to be done? I’m not one of
those men who submit to uneasiness and worry without having the force
of character to face them.

“I must think it over, come to a decision, and put it out of my mind,”
he said aloud.

“The question of her feelings, of what has passed and may be passing in
her soul, that’s not my affair; that’s the affair of her conscience,
and falls under the head of religion,” he said to himself, feeling
consolation in the sense that he had found to which division of
regulating principles this new circumstance could be properly referred.

“And so,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself, “questions as to her
feelings, and so on, are questions for her conscience, with which I can
have nothing to do. My duty is clearly defined. As the head of the
family, I am a person bound in duty to guide her, and consequently, in
part the person responsible; I am bound to point out the danger I
perceive, to warn her, even to use my authority. I ought to speak
plainly to her.” And everything that he would say tonight to his wife
took clear shape in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s head. Thinking over what he
would say, he somewhat regretted that he should have to use his time
and mental powers for domestic consumption, with so little to show for
it, but, in spite of that, the form and contents of the speech before
him shaped itself as clearly and distinctly in his head as a
ministerial report.

“I must say and express fully the following points: first, exposition
of the value to be attached to public opinion and to decorum; secondly,
exposition of religious significance of marriage; thirdly, if need be,
reference to the calamity possibly ensuing to our son; fourthly,
reference to the unhappiness likely to result to herself.” And,
interlacing his fingers, Alexey Alexandrovitch stretched them, and the
joints of the fingers cracked. This trick, a bad habit, the cracking of
his fingers, always soothed him, and gave precision to his thoughts, so
needful to him at this juncture.

There was the sound of a carriage driving up to the front door. Alexey
Alexandrovitch halted in the middle of the room.

A woman’s step was heard mounting the stairs. Alexey Alexandrovitch,
ready for his speech, stood compressing his crossed fingers, waiting to
see if the crack would not come again. One joint cracked.

Already, from the sound of light steps on the stairs, he was aware that
she was close, and though he was satisfied with his speech, he felt
frightened of the explanation confronting him....


Chapter 9

Anna came in with hanging head, playing with the tassels of her hood.
Her face was brilliant and glowing; but this glow was not one of
brightness; it suggested the fearful glow of a conflagration in the
midst of a dark night. On seeing her husband, Anna raised her head and
smiled, as though she had just waked up.

“You’re not in bed? What a wonder!” she said, letting fall her hood,
and without stopping, she went on into the dressing-room. “It’s late,
Alexey Alexandrovitch,” she said, when she had gone through the
doorway.

“Anna, it’s necessary for me to have a talk with you.”

“With me?” she said, wonderingly. She came out from behind the door of
the dressing-room, and looked at him. “Why, what is it? What about?”
she asked, sitting down. “Well, let’s talk, if it’s so necessary. But
it would be better to get to sleep.”

Anna said what came to her lips, and marveled, hearing herself, at her
own capacity for lying. How simple and natural were her words, and how
likely that she was simply sleepy! She felt herself clad in an
impenetrable armor of falsehood. She felt that some unseen force had
come to her aid and was supporting her.

“Anna, I must warn you,” he began.

“Warn me?” she said. “Of what?”

She looked at him so simply, so brightly, that anyone who did not know
her as her husband knew her could not have noticed anything unnatural,
either in the sound or the sense of her words. But to him, knowing her,
knowing that whenever he went to bed five minutes later than usual, she
noticed it, and asked him the reason; to him, knowing that every joy,
every pleasure and pain that she felt she communicated to him at once;
to him, now to see that she did not care to notice his state of mind,
that she did not care to say a word about herself, meant a great deal.
He saw that the inmost recesses of her soul, that had always hitherto
lain open before him, were closed against him. More than that, he saw
from her tone that she was not even perturbed at that, but as it were
said straight out to him: “Yes, it’s shut up, and so it must be, and
will be in future.” Now he experienced a feeling such as a man might
have, returning home and finding his own house locked up. “But perhaps
the key may yet be found,” thought Alexey Alexandrovitch.

“I want to warn you,” he said in a low voice, “that through
thoughtlessness and lack of caution you may cause yourself to be talked
about in society. Your too animated conversation this evening with
Count Vronsky” (he enunciated the name firmly and with deliberate
emphasis) “attracted attention.”

He talked and looked at her laughing eyes, which frightened him now
with their impenetrable look, and, as he talked, he felt all the
uselessness and idleness of his words.

“You’re always like that,” she answered, as though completely
misapprehending him, and of all he had said only taking in the last
phrase. “One time you don’t like my being dull, and another time you
don’t like my being lively. I wasn’t dull. Does that offend you?”

Alexey Alexandrovitch shivered, and bent his hands to make the joints
crack.

“Oh, please, don’t do that, I do so dislike it,” she said.

“Anna, is this you?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, quietly making an
effort over himself, and restraining the motion of his fingers.

“But what is it all about?” she said, with such genuine and droll
wonder. “What do you want of me?”

Alexey Alexandrovitch paused, and rubbed his forehead and his eyes. He
saw that instead of doing as he had intended—that is to say, warning
his wife against a mistake in the eyes of the world—he had
unconsciously become agitated over what was the affair of her
conscience, and was struggling against the barrier he fancied between
them.

“This is what I meant to say to you,” he went on coldly and composedly,
“and I beg you to listen to it. I consider jealousy, as you know, a
humiliating and degrading feeling, and I shall never allow myself to be
influenced by it; but there are certain rules of decorum which cannot
be disregarded with impunity. This evening it was not I observed it,
but judging by the impression made on the company, everyone observed
that your conduct and deportment were not altogether what could be
desired.”

“I positively don’t understand,” said Anna, shrugging her shoulders—“He
doesn’t care,” she thought. “But other people noticed it, and that’s
what upsets him.”—“You’re not well, Alexey Alexandrovitch,” she added,
and she got up, and would have gone towards the door; but he moved
forward as though he would stop her.

His face was ugly and forbidding, as Anna had never seen him. She
stopped, and bending her head back and on one side, began with her
rapid hand taking out her hairpins.

“Well, I’m listening to what’s to come,” she said, calmly and
ironically; “and indeed I listen with interest, for I should like to
understand what’s the matter.”

She spoke, and marveled at the confident, calm, and natural tone in
which she was speaking, and the choice of the words she used.

“To enter into all the details of your feelings I have no right, and
besides, I regard that as useless and even harmful,” began Alexey
Alexandrovitch. “Ferreting in one’s soul, one often ferrets out
something that might have lain there unnoticed. Your feelings are an
affair of your own conscience; but I am in duty bound to you, to
myself, and to God, to point out to you your duties. Our life has been
joined, not by man, but by God. That union can only be severed by a
crime, and a crime of that nature brings its own chastisement.”

“I don’t understand a word. And, oh dear! how sleepy I am, unluckily,”
she said, rapidly passing her hand through her hair, feeling for the
remaining hairpins.

“Anna, for God’s sake don’t speak like that!” he said gently. “Perhaps
I am mistaken, but believe me, what I say, I say as much for myself as
for you. I am your husband, and I love you.”

For an instant her face fell, and the mocking gleam in her eyes died
away; but the word _love_ threw her into revolt again. She thought:
“Love? Can he love? If he hadn’t heard there was such a thing as love,
he would never have used the word. He doesn’t even know what love is.”

“Alexey Alexandrovitch, really I don’t understand,” she said. “Define
what it is you find....”

“Pardon, let me say all I have to say. I love you. But I am not
speaking of myself; the most important persons in this matter are our
son and yourself. It may very well be, I repeat, that my words seem to
you utterly unnecessary and out of place; it may be that they are
called forth by my mistaken impression. In that case, I beg you to
forgive me. But if you are conscious yourself of even the smallest
foundation for them, then I beg you to think a little, and if your
heart prompts you, to speak out to me....”

Alexey Alexandrovitch was unconsciously saying something utterly unlike
what he had prepared.

“I have nothing to say. And besides,” she said hurriedly, with
difficulty repressing a smile, “it’s really time to be in bed.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed, and, without saying more, went into the
bedroom.

When she came into the bedroom, he was already in bed. His lips were
sternly compressed, and his eyes looked away from her. Anna got into
her bed, and lay expecting every minute that he would begin to speak to
her again. She both feared his speaking and wished for it. But he was
silent. She waited for a long while without moving, and had forgotten
about him. She thought of that other; she pictured him, and felt how
her heart was flooded with emotion and guilty delight at the thought of
him. Suddenly she heard an even, tranquil snore. For the first instant
Alexey Alexandrovitch seemed, as it were, appalled at his own snoring,
and ceased; but after an interval of two breathings the snore sounded
again, with a new tranquil rhythm.

“It’s late, it’s late,” she whispered with a smile. A long while she
lay, not moving, with open eyes, whose brilliance she almost fancied
she could herself see in the darkness.


Chapter 10

From that time a new life began for Alexey Alexandrovitch and for his
wife. Nothing special happened. Anna went out into society, as she had
always done, was particularly often at Princess Betsy’s, and met
Vronsky everywhere. Alexey Alexandrovitch saw this, but could do
nothing. All his efforts to draw her into open discussion she
confronted with a barrier which he could not penetrate, made up of a
sort of amused perplexity. Outwardly everything was the same, but their
inner relations were completely changed. Alexey Alexandrovitch, a man
of great power in the world of politics, felt himself helpless in this.
Like an ox with head bent, submissively he awaited the blow which he
felt was lifted over him. Every time he began to think about it, he
felt that he must try once more, that by kindness, tenderness, and
persuasion there was still hope of saving her, of bringing her back to
herself, and every day he made ready to talk to her. But every time he
began talking to her, he felt that the spirit of evil and deceit, which
had taken possession of her, had possession of him too, and he talked
to her in a tone quite unlike that in which he had meant to talk.
Involuntarily he talked to her in his habitual tone of jeering at
anyone who should say what he was saying. And in that tone it was
impossible to say what needed to be said to her.


Chapter 11

That which for Vronsky had been almost a whole year the one absorbing
desire of his life, replacing all his old desires; that which for Anna
had been an impossible, terrible, and even for that reason more
entrancing dream of bliss, that desire had been fulfilled. He stood
before her, pale, his lower jaw quivering, and besought her to be calm,
not knowing how or why.

“Anna! Anna!” he said with a choking voice, “Anna, for pity’s sake!...”

But the louder he spoke, the lower she dropped her once proud and gay,
now shame-stricken head, and she bowed down and sank from the sofa
where she was sitting, down on the floor, at his feet; she would have
fallen on the carpet if he had not held her.

“My God! Forgive me!” she said, sobbing, pressing his hands to her
bosom.

She felt so sinful, so guilty, that nothing was left her but to
humiliate herself and beg forgiveness; and as now there was no one in
her life but him, to him she addressed her prayer for forgiveness.
Looking at him, she had a physical sense of her humiliation, and she
could say nothing more. He felt what a murderer must feel, when he sees
the body he has robbed of life. That body, robbed by him of life, was
their love, the first stage of their love. There was something awful
and revolting in the memory of what had been bought at this fearful
price of shame. Shame at their spiritual nakedness crushed her and
infected him. But in spite of all the murderer’s horror before the body
of his victim, he must hack it to pieces, hide the body, must use what
he has gained by his murder.

And with fury, as it were with passion, the murderer falls on the body,
and drags it and hacks at it; so he covered her face and shoulders with
kisses. She held his hand, and did not stir. “Yes, these kisses—that is
what has been bought by this shame. Yes, and one hand, which will
always be mine—the hand of my accomplice.” She lifted up that hand and
kissed it. He sank on his knees and tried to see her face; but she hid
it, and said nothing. At last, as though making an effort over herself,
she got up and pushed him away. Her face was still as beautiful, but it
was only the more pitiful for that.

“All is over,” she said; “I have nothing but you. Remember that.”

“I can never forget what is my whole life. For one instant of this
happiness....”

“Happiness!” she said with horror and loathing and her horror

once, that both were lavishing caresses on her. Alexey Alexandrovitch
was weeping, kissing her hands, and saying, “How happy we are now!” And
Alexey Vronsky was there too, and he too was her husband. And she was
marveling that it had once seemed impossible to her, was explaining to
them, laughing, that this was ever so much simpler, and that now both
of them were happy and contented. But this dream weighed on her like a
nightmare, and she awoke from it in terror.


Chapter 12

In the early days after his return from Moscow, whenever Levin
shuddered and grew red, remembering the disgrace of his rejection, he
said to himself: “This was just how I used to shudder and blush,
thinking myself utterly lost, when I was plucked in physics and did not
get my remove; and how I thought myself utterly ruined after I had
mismanaged that affair of my sister’s that was entrusted to me. And
yet, now that years have passed, I recall it and wonder that it could
distress me so much. It will be the same thing too with this trouble.
Time will go by and I shall not mind about this either.”

But three months had passed and he had not left off minding about it;
and it was as painful for him to think of it as it had been those first
days. He could not be at peace because after dreaming so long of family
life, and feeling himself so ripe for it, he was still not married, and
was further than ever from marriage. He was painfully conscious
himself, as were all about him, that at his years it is not well for
man to be alone. He remembered how before starting for Moscow he had
once said to his cowman Nikolay, a simple-hearted peasant, whom he
liked talking to: “Well, Nikolay! I mean to get married,” and how
Nikolay had promptly answered, as of a matter on which there could be
no possible doubt: “And high time too, Konstantin Dmitrievitch.” But
marriage had now become further off than ever. The place was taken, and
whenever he tried to imagine any of the girls he knew in that place, he
felt that it was utterly impossible. Moreover, the recollection of the
rejection and the part he had played in the affair tortured him with
shame. However often he told himself that he was in no wise to blame in
it, that recollection, like other humiliating reminiscences of a
similar kind, made him twinge and blush. There had been in his past, as
in every man’s, actions, recognized by him as bad, for which his
conscience ought to have tormented him; but the memory of these evil
actions was far from causing him so much suffering as those trivial but
humiliating reminiscences. These wounds never healed. And with these
memories was now ranged his rejection and the pitiful position in which
he must have appeared to others that evening. But time and work did
their part. Bitter memories were more and more covered up by the
incidents—paltry in his eyes, but really important—of his country life.
Every week he thought less often of Kitty. He was impatiently looking
forward to the news that she was married, or just going to be married,
hoping that such news would, like having a tooth out, completely cure
him.

Meanwhile spring came on, beautiful and kindly, without the delays and
treacheries of spring,—one of those rare springs in which plants,
beasts, and man rejoice alike. This lovely spring roused Levin still
more, and strengthened him in his resolution of renouncing all his past
and building up his lonely life firmly and independently. Though many
of the plans with which he had returned to the country had not been
carried out, still his most important resolution—that of purity—had
been kept by him. He was free from that shame, which had usually
harassed him after a fall; and he could look everyone straight in the
face. In February he had received a letter from Marya Nikolaevna
telling him that his brother Nikolay’s health was getting worse, but
that he would not take advice, and in consequence of this letter Levin
went to Moscow to his brother’s and succeeded in persuading him to see
a doctor and to go to a watering-place abroad. He succeeded so well in
persuading his brother, and in lending him money for the journey
without irritating him, that he was satisfied with himself in that
matter. In addition to his farming, which called for special attention
in spring, and in addition to reading, Levin had begun that winter a
work on agriculture, the plan of which turned on taking into account
the character of the laborer on the land as one of the unalterable data
of the question, like the climate and the soil, and consequently
deducing all the principles of scientific culture, not simply from the
data of soil and climate, but from the data of soil, climate, and a
certain unalterable character of the laborer. Thus, in spite of his
solitude, or in consequence of his solitude, his life was exceedingly
full. Only rarely he suffered from an unsatisfied desire to communicate
his stray ideas to someone besides Agafea Mihalovna. With her indeed he
not infrequently fell into discussion upon physics, the theory of
agriculture, and especially philosophy; philosophy was Agafea
Mihalovna’s favorite subject.

Spring was slow in unfolding. For the last few weeks it had been
steadily fine frosty weather. In the daytime it thawed in the sun, but
at night there were even seven degrees of frost. There was such a
frozen surface on the snow that they drove the wagons anywhere off the
roads. Easter came in the snow. Then all of a sudden, on Easter Monday,
a warm wind sprang up, storm clouds swooped down, and for three days
and three nights the warm, driving rain fell in streams. On Thursday
the wind dropped, and a thick gray fog brooded over the land as though
hiding the mysteries of the transformations that were being wrought in
nature. Behind the fog there was the flowing of water, the cracking and
floating of ice, the swift rush of turbid, foaming torrents; and on the
following Monday, in the evening, the fog parted, the storm clouds
split up into little curling crests of cloud, the sky cleared, and the
real spring had come. In the morning the sun rose brilliant and quickly
wore away the thin layer of ice that covered the water, and all the
warm air was quivering with the steam that rose up from the quickened
earth. The old grass looked greener, and the young grass thrust up its
tiny blades; the buds of the guelder-rose and of the currant and the
sticky birch-buds were swollen with sap, and an exploring bee was
humming about the golden blossoms that studded the willow. Larks
trilled unseen above the velvety green fields and the ice-covered
stubble-land; peewits wailed over the low lands and marshes flooded by
the pools; cranes and wild geese flew high across the sky uttering
their spring calls. The cattle, bald in patches where the new hair had
not grown yet, lowed in the pastures; the bowlegged lambs frisked round
their bleating mothers. Nimble children ran about the drying paths,
covered with the prints of bare feet. There was a merry chatter of
peasant women over their linen at the pond, and the ring of axes in the
yard, where the peasants were repairing ploughs and harrows. The real
spring had come.


Chapter 13

Levin put on his big boots, and, for the first time, a cloth jacket,
instead of his fur cloak, and went out to look after his farm, stepping
over streams of water that flashed in the sunshine and dazzled his
eyes, and treading one minute on ice and the next into sticky mud.

Spring is the time of plans and projects. And, as he came out into the
farmyard, Levin, like a tree in spring that knows not what form will be
taken by the young shoots and twigs imprisoned in its swelling buds,
hardly knew what undertakings he was going to begin upon now in the
farm work that was so dear to him. But he felt that he was full of the
most splendid plans and projects. First of all he went to the cattle.
The cows had been let out into their paddock, and their smooth sides
were already shining with their new, sleek, spring coats; they basked
in the sunshine and lowed to go to the meadow. Levin gazed admiringly
at the cows he knew so intimately to the minutest detail of their
condition, and gave orders for them to be driven out into the meadow,
and the calves to be let into the paddock. The herdsman ran gaily to
get ready for the meadow. The cowherd girls, picking up their
petticoats, ran splashing through the mud with bare legs, still white,
not yet brown from the sun, waving brush wood in their hands, chasing
the calves that frolicked in the mirth of spring.

After admiring the young ones of that year, who were particularly
fine—the early calves were the size of a peasant’s cow, and Pava’s
daughter, at three months old, was as big as a yearling—Levin gave
orders for a trough to be brought out and for them to be fed in the
paddock. But it appeared that as the paddock had not been used during
the winter, the hurdles made in the autumn for it were broken. He sent
for the carpenter, who, according to his orders, ought to have been at
work at the thrashing machine. But it appeared that the carpenter was
repairing the harrows, which ought to have been repaired before Lent.
This was very annoying to Levin. It was annoying to come upon that
everlasting slovenliness in the farm work against which he had been
striving with all his might for so many years. The hurdles, as he
ascertained, being not wanted in winter, had been carried to the
cart-horses’ stable; and there broken, as they were of light
construction, only meant for feeding calves. Moreover, it was apparent
also that the harrows and all the agricultural implements, which he had
directed to be looked over and repaired in the winter, for which very
purpose he had hired three carpenters, had not been put into repair,
and the harrows were being repaired when they ought to have been
harrowing the field. Levin sent for his bailiff, but immediately went
off himself to look for him. The bailiff, beaming all over, like
everyone that day, in a sheepskin bordered with astrachan, came out of
the barn, twisting a bit of straw in his hands.

“Why isn’t the carpenter at the thrashing machine?”

“Oh, I meant to tell you yesterday, the harrows want repairing. Here
it’s time they got to work in the fields.”

“But what were they doing in the winter, then?”

“But what did you want the carpenter for?”

“Where are the hurdles for the calves’ paddock?”

“I ordered them to be got ready. What would you have with those
peasants!” said the bailiff, with a wave of his hand.

“It’s not those peasants but this bailiff!” said Levin, getting angry.
“Why, what do I keep you for?” he cried. But, bethinking himself that
this would not help matters, he stopped short in the middle of a
sentence, and merely sighed. “Well, what do you say? Can sowing begin?”
he asked, after a pause.

“Behind Turkin tomorrow or the next day they might begin.”

“And the clover?”

“I’ve sent Vassily and Mishka; they’re sowing. Only I don’t know if
they’ll manage to get through; it’s so slushy.”

“How many acres?”

“About fifteen.”

“Why not sow all?” cried Levin.

That they were only sowing the clover on fifteen acres, not on all the
forty-five, was still more annoying to him. Clover, as he knew, both
from books and from his own experience, never did well except when it
was sown as early as possible, almost in the snow. And yet Levin could
never get this done.

“There’s no one to send. What would you have with such a set of
peasants? Three haven’t turned up. And there’s Semyon....”

“Well, you should have taken some men from the thatching.”

“And so I have, as it is.”

“Where are the peasants, then?”

“Five are making compôte” (which meant compost), “four are shifting the
oats for fear of a touch of mildew, Konstantin Dmitrievitch.”

Levin knew very well that “a touch of mildew” meant that his English
seed oats were already ruined. Again they had not done as he had
ordered.

“Why, but I told you during Lent to put in pipes,” he cried.

“Don’t put yourself out; we shall get it all done in time.”

Levin waved his hand angrily, went into the granary to glance at the
oats, and then to the stable. The oats were not yet spoiled. But the
peasants were carrying the oats in spades when they might simply let
them slide down into the lower granary; and arranging for this to be
done, and taking two workmen from there for sowing clover, Levin got
over his vexation with the bailiff. Indeed, it was such a lovely day
that one could not be angry.

“Ignat!” he called to the coachman, who, with his sleeves tucked up,
was washing the carriage wheels, “saddle me....”

“Which, sir?”

“Well, let it be Kolpik.”

“Yes, sir.”

While they were saddling his horse, Levin again called up the bailiff,
who was hanging about in sight, to make it up with him, and began
talking to him about the spring operations before them, and his plans
for the farm.

The wagons were to begin carting manure earlier, so as to get all done
before the early mowing. And the ploughing of the further land to go on
without a break so as to let it ripen lying fallow. And the mowing to
be all done by hired labor, not on half-profits. The bailiff listened
attentively, and obviously made an effort to approve of his employer’s
projects. But still he had that look Levin knew so well that always
irritated him, a look of hopelessness and despondency. That look said:
“That’s all very well, but as God wills.”

Nothing mortified Levin so much as that tone. But it was the tone
common to all the bailiffs he had ever had. They had all taken up that
attitude to his plans, and so now he was not angered by it, but
mortified, and felt all the more roused to struggle against this, as it
seemed, elemental force continually ranged against him, for which he
could find no other expression than “as God wills.”

“If we can manage it, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” said the bailiff.

“Why ever shouldn’t you manage it?”

“We positively must have another fifteen laborers. And they don’t turn
up. There were some here today asking seventy roubles for the summer.”

Levin was silent. Again he was brought face to face with that opposing
force. He knew that however much they tried, they could not hire more
than forty—thirty-seven perhaps or thirty-eight—laborers for a
reasonable sum. Some forty had been taken on, and there were no more.
But still he could not help struggling against it.

“Send to Sury, to Tchefirovka; if they don’t come we must look for
them.”

“Oh, I’ll send, to be sure,” said Vassily Fedorovitch despondently.
“But there are the horses, too, they’re not good for much.”

“We’ll get some more. I know, of course,” Levin added laughing, “you
always want to do with as little and as poor quality as possible; but
this year I’m not going to let you have things your own way. I’ll see
to everything myself.”

“Why, I don’t think you take much rest as it is. It cheers us up to
work under the master’s eye....”

“So they’re sowing clover behind the Birch Dale? I’ll go and have a
look at them,” he said, getting on to the little bay cob, Kolpik, who
was led up by the coachman.

“You can’t get across the streams, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” the
coachman shouted.

“All right, I’ll go by the forest.”

And Levin rode through the slush of the farmyard to the gate and out
into the open country, his good little horse, after his long
inactivity, stepping out gallantly, snorting over the pools, and
asking, as it were, for guidance. If Levin had felt happy before in the
cattle pens and farmyard, he felt happier yet in the open country.
Swaying rhythmically with the ambling paces of his good little cob,
drinking in the warm yet fresh scent of the snow and the air, as he
rode through his forest over the crumbling, wasted snow, still left in
parts, and covered with dissolving tracks, he rejoiced over every tree,
with the moss reviving on its bark and the buds swelling on its shoots.
When he came out of the forest, in the immense plain before him, his
grass fields stretched in an unbroken carpet of green, without one bare
place or swamp, only spotted here and there in the hollows with patches
of melting snow. He was not put out of temper even by the sight of the
peasants’ horses and colts trampling down his young grass (he told a
peasant he met to drive them out), nor by the sarcastic and stupid
reply of the peasant Ipat, whom he met on the way, and asked, “Well,
Ipat, shall we soon be sowing?” “We must get the ploughing done first,
Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” answered Ipat. The further he rode, the
happier he became, and plans for the land rose to his mind each better
than the last; to plant all his fields with hedges along the southern
borders, so that the snow should not lie under them; to divide them up
into six fields of arable and three of pasture and hay; to build a
cattle yard at the further end of the estate, and to dig a pond and to
construct movable pens for the cattle as a means of manuring the land.
And then eight hundred acres of wheat, three hundred of potatoes, and
four hundred of clover, and not one acre exhausted.

Absorbed in such dreams, carefully keeping his horse by the hedges, so
as not to trample his young crops, he rode up to the laborers who had
been sent to sow clover. A cart with the seed in it was standing, not
at the edge, but in the middle of the crop, and the winter corn had
been torn up by the wheels and trampled by the horse. Both the laborers
were sitting in the hedge, probably smoking a pipe together. The earth
in the cart, with which the seed was mixed, was not crushed to powder,
but crusted together or adhering in clods. Seeing the master, the
laborer, Vassily, went towards the cart, while Mishka set to work
sowing. This was not as it should be, but with the laborers Levin
seldom lost his temper. When Vassily came up, Levin told him to lead
the horse to the hedge.

“It’s all right, sir, it’ll spring up again,” responded Vassily.

“Please don’t argue,” said Levin, “but do as you’re told.”

“Yes, sir,” answered Vassily, and he took the horse’s head. “What a
sowing, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” he said, hesitating; “first rate.
Only it’s a work to get about! You drag a ton of earth on your shoes.”

“Why is it you have earth that’s not sifted?” said Levin.

“Well, we crumble it up,” answered Vassily, taking up some seed and
rolling the earth in his palms.

Vassily was not to blame for their having filled up his cart with
unsifted earth, but still it was annoying.

Levin had more than once already tried a way he knew for stifling his
anger, and turning all that seemed dark right again, and he tried that
way now. He watched how Mishka strode along, swinging the huge clods of
earth that clung to each foot; and getting off his horse, he took the
sieve from Vassily and started sowing himself.

“Where did you stop?”

Vassily pointed to the mark with his foot, and Levin went forward as
best he could, scattering the seed on the land. Walking was as
difficult as on a bog, and by the time Levin had ended the row he was
in a great heat, and he stopped and gave up the sieve to Vassily.

“Well, master, when summer’s here, mind you don’t scold me for these
rows,” said Vassily.

“Eh?” said Levin cheerily, already feeling the effect of his method.

“Why, you’ll see in the summer time. It’ll look different. Look you
where I sowed last spring. How I did work at it! I do my best,
Konstantin Dmitrievitch, d’ye see, as I would for my own father. I
don’t like bad work myself, nor would I let another man do it. What’s
good for the master’s good for us too. To look out yonder now,” said
Vassily, pointing, “it does one’s heart good.”

“It’s a lovely spring, Vassily.”

“Why, it’s a spring such as the old men don’t remember the like of. I
was up home; an old man up there has sown wheat too, about an acre of
it. He was saying you wouldn’t know it from rye.”

“Have you been sowing wheat long?”

“Why, sir, it was you taught us the year before last. You gave me two
measures. We sold about eight bushels and sowed a rood.”

“Well, mind you crumble up the clods,” said Levin, going towards his
horse, “and keep an eye on Mishka. And if there’s a good crop you shall
have half a rouble for every acre.”

“Humbly thankful. We are very well content, sir, as it is.”

Levin got on his horse and rode towards the field where was last year’s
clover, and the one which was ploughed ready for the spring corn.

The crop of clover coming up in the stubble was magnificent. It had
survived everything, and stood up vividly green through the broken
stalks of last year’s wheat. The horse sank in up to the pasterns, and
he drew each hoof with a sucking sound out of the half-thawed ground.
Over the ploughland riding was utterly impossible; the horse could only
keep a foothold where there was ice, and in the thawing furrows he sank
deep in at each step. The ploughland was in splendid condition; in a
couple of days it would be fit for harrowing and sowing. Everything was
capital, everything was cheering. Levin rode back across the streams,
hoping the water would have gone down. And he did in fact get across,
and startled two ducks. “There must be snipe too,” he thought, and just
as he reached the turning homewards he met the forest keeper, who
confirmed his theory about the snipe.

Levin went home at a trot, so as to have time to eat his dinner and get
his gun ready for the evening.


Chapter 14

As he rode up to the house in the happiest frame of mind, Levin heard
the bell ring at the side of the principal entrance of the house.

“Yes, that’s someone from the railway station,” he thought, “just the
time to be here from the Moscow train ... Who could it be? What if it’s
brother Nikolay? He did say: ‘Maybe I’ll go to the waters, or maybe
I’ll come down to you.’” He felt dismayed and vexed for the first
minute, that his brother Nikolay’s presence should come to disturb his
happy mood of spring. But he felt ashamed of the feeling, and at once
he opened, as it were, the arms of his soul, and with a softened
feeling of joy and expectation, now he hoped with all his heart that it
was his brother. He pricked up his horse, and riding out from behind
the acacias he saw a hired three-horse sledge from the railway station,
and a gentleman in a fur coat. It was not his brother. “Oh, if it were
only some nice person one could talk to a little!” he thought.

“Ah,” cried Levin joyfully, flinging up both his hands. “Here’s a
delightful visitor! Ah, how glad I am to see you!” he shouted,
recognizing Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“I shall find out for certain whether she’s married, or when she’s
going to be married,” he thought. And on that delicious spring day he
felt that the thought of her did not hurt him at all.

“Well, you didn’t expect me, eh?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting out
of the sledge, splashed with mud on the bridge of his nose, on his
cheek, and on his eyebrows, but radiant with health and good spirits.
“I’ve come to see you in the first place,” he said, embracing and
kissing him, “to have some stand-shooting second, and to sell the
forest at Ergushovo third.”

“Delightful! What a spring we’re having! How ever did you get along in
a sledge?”

“In a cart it would have been worse still, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,”
answered the driver, who knew him.

“Well, I’m very, very glad to see you,” said Levin, with a genuine
smile of childlike delight.

Levin led his friend to the room set apart for visitors, where Stepan
Arkadyevitch’s things were carried also—a bag, a gun in a case, a
satchel for cigars. Leaving him there to wash and change his clothes,
Levin went off to the counting house to speak about the ploughing and
clover. Agafea Mihalovna, always very anxious for the credit of the
house, met him in the hall with inquiries about dinner.

“Do just as you like, only let it be as soon as possible,” he said, and
went to the bailiff.

When he came back, Stepan Arkadyevitch, washed and combed, came out of
his room with a beaming smile, and they went upstairs together.

“Well, I am glad I managed to get away to you! Now I shall understand
what the mysterious business is that you are always absorbed in here.
No, really, I envy you. What a house, how nice it all is! So bright, so
cheerful!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgetting that it was not always
spring and fine weather like that day. “And your nurse is simply
charming! A pretty maid in an apron might be even more agreeable,
perhaps; but for your severe monastic style it does very well.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch told him many interesting pieces of news;
especially interesting to Levin was the news that his brother, Sergey
Ivanovitch, was intending to pay him a visit in the summer.

Not one word did Stepan Arkadyevitch say in reference to Kitty and the
Shtcherbatskys; he merely gave him greetings from his wife. Levin was
grateful to him for his delicacy and was very glad of his visitor. As
always happened with him during his solitude, a mass of ideas and
feelings had been accumulating within him, which he could not
communicate to those about him. And now he poured out upon Stepan
Arkadyevitch his poetic joy in the spring, and his failures and plans
for the land, and his thoughts and criticisms on the books he had been
reading, and the idea of his own book, the basis of which really was,
though he was unaware of it himself, a criticism of all the old books
on agriculture. Stepan Arkadyevitch, always charming, understanding
everything at the slightest reference, was particularly charming on
this visit, and Levin noticed in him a special tenderness, as it were,
and a new tone of respect that flattered him.

The efforts of Agafea Mihalovna and the cook, that the dinner should be
particularly good, only ended in the two famished friends attacking the
preliminary course, eating a great deal of bread and butter, salt goose
and salted mushrooms, and in Levin’s finally ordering the soup to be
served without the accompaniment of little pies, with which the cook
had particularly meant to impress their visitor. But though Stepan
Arkadyevitch was accustomed to very different dinners, he thought
everything excellent: the herb brandy, and the bread, and the butter,
and above all the salt goose and the mushrooms, and the nettle soup,
and the chicken in white sauce, and the white Crimean wine—everything
was superb and delicious.

“Splendid, splendid!” he said, lighting a fat cigar after the roast. “I
feel as if, coming to you, I had landed on a peaceful shore after the
noise and jolting of a steamer. And so you maintain that the laborer
himself is an element to be studied and to regulate the choice of
methods in agriculture. Of course, I’m an ignorant outsider; but I
should fancy theory and its application will have its influence on the
laborer too.”

“Yes, but wait a bit. I’m not talking of political economy, I’m talking
of the science of agriculture. It ought to be like the natural
sciences, and to observe given phenomena and the laborer in his
economic, ethnographical....”

At that instant Agafea Mihalovna came in with jam.

“Oh, Agafea Mihalovna,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, kissing the tips of
his plump fingers, “what salt goose, what herb brandy!... What do you
think, isn’t it time to start, Kostya?” he added.

Levin looked out of the window at the sun sinking behind the bare
tree-tops of the forest.

“Yes, it’s time,” he said. “Kouzma, get ready the trap,” and he ran
downstairs.

Stepan Arkadyevitch, going down, carefully took the canvas cover off
his varnished gun case with his own hands, and opening it, began to get
ready his expensive new-fashioned gun. Kouzma, who already scented a
big tip, never left Stepan Arkadyevitch’s side, and put on him both his
stockings and boots, a task which Stepan Arkadyevitch readily left him.

“Kostya, give orders that if the merchant Ryabinin comes ... I told him
to come today, he’s to be brought in and to wait for me....”

“Why, do you mean to say you’re selling the forest to Ryabinin?”

“Yes. Do you know him?”

“To be sure I do. I have had to do business with him, ‘positively and
conclusively.’”

Stepan Arkadyevitch laughed. “Positively and conclusively” were the
merchant’s favorite words.

“Yes, it’s wonderfully funny the way he talks. She knows where her
master’s going!” he added, patting Laska, who hung about Levin, whining
and licking his hands, his boots, and his gun.

The trap was already at the steps when they went out.

“I told them to bring the trap round; or would you rather walk?”

“No, we’d better drive,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting into the
trap. He sat down, tucked the tiger-skin rug round him, and lighted a
cigar. “How is it you don’t smoke? A cigar is a sort of thing, not
exactly a pleasure, but the crown and outward sign of pleasure. Come,
this is life! How splendid it is! This is how I should like to live!”

“Why, who prevents you?” said Levin, smiling.

“No, you’re a lucky man! You’ve got everything you like. You like
horses—and you have them; dogs—you have them; shooting—you have it;
farming—you have it.”

“Perhaps because I rejoice in what I have, and don’t fret for what I
haven’t,” said Levin, thinking of Kitty.

Stepan Arkadyevitch comprehended, looked at him, but said nothing.

Levin was grateful to Oblonsky for noticing, with his never-failing
tact, that he dreaded conversation about the Shtcherbatskys, and so
saying nothing about them. But now Levin was longing to find out what
was tormenting him so, yet he had not the courage to begin.

“Come, tell me how things are going with you,” said Levin, bethinking
himself that it was not nice of him to think only of himself.

Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes sparkled merrily.

“You don’t admit, I know, that one can be fond of new rolls when one
has had one’s rations of bread—to your mind it’s a crime; but I don’t
count life as life without love,” he said, taking Levin’s question his
own way. “What am I to do? I’m made that way. And really, one does so
little harm to anyone, and gives oneself so much pleasure....”

“What! is there something new, then?” queried Levin.

“Yes, my boy, there is! There, do you see, you know the type of
Ossian’s women.... Women, such as one sees in dreams.... Well, these
women are sometimes to be met in reality ... and these women are
terrible. Woman, don’t you know, is such a subject that however much
you study it, it’s always perfectly new.”

“Well, then, it would be better not to study it.”

“No. Some mathematician has said that enjoyment lies in the search for
truth, not in the finding it.”

Levin listened in silence, and in spite of all the efforts he made, he
could not in the least enter into the feelings of his friend and
understand his sentiments and the charm of studying such women.


Chapter 15

The place fixed on for the stand-shooting was not far above a stream in
a little aspen copse. On reaching the copse, Levin got out of the trap
and led Oblonsky to a corner of a mossy, swampy glade, already quite
free from snow. He went back himself to a double birch tree on the
other side, and leaning his gun on the fork of a dead lower branch, he
took off his full overcoat, fastened his belt again, and worked his
arms to see if they were free.

Gray old Laska, who had followed them, sat down warily opposite him and
pricked up her ears. The sun was setting behind a thick forest, and in
the glow of sunset the birch trees, dotted about in the aspen copse,
stood out clearly with their hanging twigs, and their buds swollen
almost to bursting.

From the thickest parts of the copse, where the snow still remained,
came the faint sound of narrow winding threads of water running away.
Tiny birds twittered, and now and then fluttered from tree to tree.

In the pauses of complete stillness there came the rustle of last
year’s leaves, stirred by the thawing of the earth and the growth of
the grass.

“Imagine! One can hear and see the grass growing!” Levin said to
himself, noticing a wet, slate-colored aspen leaf moving beside a blade
of young grass. He stood, listened, and gazed sometimes down at the wet
mossy ground, sometimes at Laska listening all alert, sometimes at the
sea of bare tree tops that stretched on the slope below him, sometimes
at the darkening sky, covered with white streaks of cloud.

A hawk flew high over a forest far away with slow sweep of its wings;
another flew with exactly the same motion in the same direction and
vanished. The birds twittered more and more loudly and busily in the
thicket. An owl hooted not far off, and Laska, starting, stepped
cautiously a few steps forward, and putting her head on one side, began
to listen intently. Beyond the stream was heard the cuckoo. Twice she
uttered her usual cuckoo call, and then gave a hoarse, hurried call and
broke down.

“Imagine! the cuckoo already!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, coming out
from behind a bush.

“Yes, I hear it,” answered Levin, reluctantly breaking the stillness
with his voice, which sounded disagreeable to himself. “Now it’s
coming!”

Stepan Arkadyevitch’s figure again went behind the bush, and Levin saw
nothing but the bright flash of a match, followed by the red glow and
blue smoke of a cigarette.

“Tchk! tchk!” came the snapping sound of Stepan Arkadyevitch cocking
his gun.

“What’s that cry?” asked Oblonsky, drawing Levin’s attention to a
prolonged cry, as though a colt were whinnying in a high voice, in
play.

“Oh, don’t you know it? That’s the hare. But enough talking! Listen,
it’s flying!” almost shrieked Levin, cocking his gun.

They heard a shrill whistle in the distance, and in the exact time, so
well known to the sportsman, two seconds later—another, a third, and
after the third whistle the hoarse, guttural cry could be heard.

Levin looked about him to right and to left, and there, just facing him
against the dusky blue sky above the confused mass of tender shoots of
the aspens, he saw the flying bird. It was flying straight towards him;
the guttural cry, like the even tearing of some strong stuff, sounded
close to his ear; the long beak and neck of the bird could be seen, and
at the very instant when Levin was taking aim, behind the bush where
Oblonsky stood, there was a flash of red lightning: the bird dropped
like an arrow, and darted upwards again. Again came the red flash and
the sound of a blow, and fluttering its wings as though trying to keep
up in the air, the bird halted, stopped still an instant, and fell with
a heavy splash on the slushy ground.

“Can I have missed it?” shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch, who could not see
for the smoke.

“Here it is!” said Levin, pointing to Laska, who with one ear raised,
wagging the end of her shaggy tail, came slowly back as though she
would prolong the pleasure, and as it were smiling, brought the dead
bird to her master. “Well, I’m glad you were successful,” said Levin,
who, at the same time, had a sense of envy that he had not succeeded in
shooting the snipe.

“It was a bad shot from the right barrel,” responded Stepan
Arkadyevitch, loading his gun. “Sh... it’s flying!”

The shrill whistles rapidly following one another were heard again. Two
snipe, playing and chasing one another, and only whistling, not crying,
flew straight at the very heads of the sportsmen. There was the report
of four shots, and like swallows the snipe turned swift somersaults in
the air and vanished from sight.



The stand-shooting was capital. Stepan Arkadyevitch shot two more birds
and Levin two, of which one was not found. It began to get dark. Venus,
bright and silvery, shone with her soft light low down in the west
behind the birch trees, and high up in the east twinkled the red lights
of Arcturus. Over his head Levin made out the stars of the Great Bear
and lost them again. The snipe had ceased flying; but Levin resolved to
stay a little longer, till Venus, which he saw below a branch of birch,
should be above it, and the stars of the Great Bear should be perfectly
plain. Venus had risen above the branch, and the ear of the Great Bear
with its shaft was now all plainly visible against the dark blue sky,
yet still he waited.

“Isn’t it time to go home?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

It was quite still now in the copse, and not a bird was stirring.

“Let’s stay a little while,” answered Levin.

“As you like.”

They were standing now about fifteen paces from one another.

“Stiva!” said Levin unexpectedly; “how is it you don’t tell me whether
your sister-in-law’s married yet, or when she’s going to be?”

Levin felt so resolute and serene that no answer, he fancied, could
affect him. But he had never dreamed of what Stepan Arkadyevitch
replied.

“She’s never thought of being married, and isn’t thinking of it; but
she’s very ill, and the doctors have sent her abroad. They’re
positively afraid she may not live.”

“What!” cried Levin. “Very ill? What is wrong with her? How has
she...?”

While they were saying this, Laska, with ears pricked up, was looking
upwards at the sky, and reproachfully at them.

“They have chosen a time to talk,” she was thinking. “It’s on the
wing.... Here it is, yes, it is. They’ll miss it,” thought Laska.

But at that very instant both suddenly heard a shrill whistle which, as
it were, smote on their ears, and both suddenly seized their guns and
two flashes gleamed, and two bangs sounded at the very same instant.
The snipe flying high above instantly folded its wings and fell into a
thicket, bending down the delicate shoots.

“Splendid! Together!” cried Levin, and he ran with Laska into the
thicket to look for the snipe.

“Oh, yes, what was it that was unpleasant?” he wondered. “Yes, Kitty’s
ill.... Well, it can’t be helped; I’m very sorry,” he thought.

“She’s found it! Isn’t she a clever thing?” he said, taking the warm
bird from Laska’s mouth and packing it into the almost full game bag.
“I’ve got it, Stiva!” he shouted.


Chapter 16

On the way home Levin asked all details of Kitty’s illness and the
Shtcherbatskys’ plans, and though he would have been ashamed to admit
it, he was pleased at what he heard. He was pleased that there was
still hope, and still more pleased that she should be suffering who had
made him suffer so much. But when Stepan Arkadyevitch began to speak of
the causes of Kitty’s illness, and mentioned Vronsky’s name, Levin cut
him short.

“I have no right whatever to know family matters, and, to tell the
truth, no interest in them either.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled hardly perceptibly, catching the
instantaneous change he knew so well in Levin’s face, which had become
as gloomy as it had been bright a minute before.

“Have you quite settled about the forest with Ryabinin?” asked Levin.

“Yes, it’s settled. The price is magnificent; thirty-eight thousand.
Eight straight away, and the rest in six years. I’ve been bothering
about it for ever so long. No one would give more.”

“Then you’ve as good as given away your forest for nothing,” said Levin
gloomily.

“How do you mean for nothing?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with a
good-humored smile, knowing that nothing would be right in Levin’s eyes
now.

“Because the forest is worth at least a hundred and fifty roubles the
acre,” answered Levin.

“Oh, these farmers!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch playfully. “Your tone of
contempt for us poor townsfolk!... But when it comes to business, we do
it better than anyone. I assure you I have reckoned it all out,” he
said, “and the forest is fetching a very good price—so much so that I’m
afraid of this fellow’s crying off, in fact. You know it’s not
‘timber,’” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, hoping by this distinction to
convince Levin completely of the unfairness of his doubts. “And it
won’t run to more than twenty-five yards of fagots per acre, and he’s
giving me at the rate of seventy roubles the acre.”

Levin smiled contemptuously. “I know,” he thought, “that fashion not
only in him, but in all city people, who, after being twice in ten
years in the country, pick up two or three phrases and use them in
season and out of season, firmly persuaded that they know all about it.
‘_Timber, run to so many yards the acre._’ He says those words without
understanding them himself.”

“I wouldn’t attempt to teach you what you write about in your office,”
said he, “and if need arose, I should come to you to ask about it. But
you’re so positive you know all the lore of the forest. It’s difficult.
Have you counted the trees?”

“How count the trees?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing, still trying
to draw his friend out of his ill-temper. “Count the sands of the sea,
number the stars. Some higher power might do it.”

“Oh, well, the higher power of Ryabinin can. Not a single merchant ever
buys a forest without counting the trees, unless they get it given them
for nothing, as you’re doing now. I know your forest. I go there every
year shooting, and your forest’s worth a hundred and fifty roubles an
acre paid down, while he’s giving you sixty by installments. So that in
fact you’re making him a present of thirty thousand.”

“Come, don’t let your imagination run away with you,” said Stepan
Arkadyevitch piteously. “Why was it none would give it, then?”

“Why, because he has an understanding with the merchants; he’s bought
them off. I’ve had to do with all of them; I know them. They’re not
merchants, you know: they’re speculators. He wouldn’t look at a bargain
that gave him ten, fifteen per cent. profit, but holds back to buy a
rouble’s worth for twenty kopecks.”

“Well, enough of it! You’re out of temper.”

“Not the least,” said Levin gloomily, as they drove up to the house.

At the steps there stood a trap tightly covered with iron and leather,
with a sleek horse tightly harnessed with broad collar-straps. In the
trap sat the chubby, tightly belted clerk who served Ryabinin as
coachman. Ryabinin himself was already in the house, and met the
friends in the hall. Ryabinin was a tall, thinnish, middle-aged man,
with mustache and a projecting clean-shaven chin, and prominent
muddy-looking eyes. He was dressed in a long-skirted blue coat, with
buttons below the waist at the back, and wore high boots wrinkled over
the ankles and straight over the calf, with big galoshes drawn over
them. He rubbed his face with his handkerchief, and wrapping round him
his coat, which sat extremely well as it was, he greeted them with a
smile, holding out his hand to Stepan Arkadyevitch, as though he wanted
to catch something.

“So here you are,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, giving him his hand.
“That’s capital.”

“I did not venture to disregard your excellency’s commands, though the
road was extremely bad. I positively walked the whole way, but I am
here at my time. Konstantin Dmitrievitch, my respects”; he turned to
Levin, trying to seize his hand too. But Levin, scowling, made as
though he did not notice his hand, and took out the snipe. “Your honors
have been diverting yourselves with the chase? What kind of bird may it
be, pray?” added Ryabinin, looking contemptuously at the snipe: “a
great delicacy, I suppose.” And he shook his head disapprovingly, as
though he had grave doubts whether this game were worth the candle.

“Would you like to go into my study?” Levin said in French to Stepan
Arkadyevitch, scowling morosely. “Go into my study; you can talk
there.”

“Quite so, where you please,” said Ryabinin with contemptuous dignity,
as though wishing to make it felt that others might be in difficulties
as to how to behave, but that he could never be in any difficulty about
anything.

On entering the study Ryabinin looked about, as his habit was, as
though seeking the holy picture, but when he had found it, he did not
cross himself. He scanned the bookcases and bookshelves, and with the
same dubious air with which he had regarded the snipe, he smiled
contemptuously and shook his head disapprovingly, as though by no means
willing to allow that this game were worth the candle.

“Well, have you brought the money?” asked Oblonsky. “Sit down.”

“Oh, don’t trouble about the money. I’ve come to see you to talk it
over.”

“What is there to talk over? But do sit down.”

“I don’t mind if I do,” said Ryabinin, sitting down and leaning his
elbows on the back of his chair in a position of the intensest
discomfort to himself. “You must knock it down a bit, prince. It would
be too bad. The money is ready conclusively to the last farthing. As to
paying the money down, there’ll be no hitch there.”

Levin, who had meanwhile been putting his gun away in the cupboard, was
just going out of the door, but catching the merchant’s words, he
stopped.

“Why, you’ve got the forest for nothing as it is,” he said. “He came to
me too late, or I’d have fixed the price for him.”

Ryabinin got up, and in silence, with a smile, he looked Levin down and
up.

“Very close about money is Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” he said with a
smile, turning to Stepan Arkadyevitch; “there’s positively no dealing
with him. I was bargaining for some wheat of him, and a pretty price I
offered too.”

“Why should I give you my goods for nothing? I didn’t pick it up on the
ground, nor steal it either.”

“Mercy on us! nowadays there’s no chance at all of stealing. With the
open courts and everything done in style, nowadays there’s no question
of stealing. We are just talking things over like gentlemen. His
excellency’s asking too much for the forest. I can’t make both ends
meet over it. I must ask for a little concession.”

“But is the thing settled between you or not? If it’s settled, it’s
useless haggling; but if it’s not,” said Levin, “I’ll buy the forest.”

The smile vanished at once from Ryabinin’s face. A hawklike, greedy,
cruel expression was left upon it. With rapid, bony fingers he
unbuttoned his coat, revealing a shirt, bronze waistcoat buttons, and a
watch chain, and quickly pulled out a fat old pocketbook.

“Here you are, the forest is mine,” he said, crossing himself quickly,
and holding out his hand. “Take the money; it’s my forest. That’s
Ryabinin’s way of doing business; he doesn’t haggle over every
half-penny,” he added, scowling and waving the pocketbook.

“I wouldn’t be in a hurry if I were you,” said Levin.

“Come, really,” said Oblonsky in surprise. “I’ve given my word, you
know.”

Levin went out of the room, slamming the door. Ryabinin looked towards
the door and shook his head with a smile.

“It’s all youthfulness—positively nothing but boyishness. Why, I’m
buying it, upon my honor, simply, believe me, for the glory of it, that
Ryabinin, and no one else, should have bought the copse of Oblonsky.
And as to the profits, why, I must make what God gives. In God’s name.
If you would kindly sign the title-deed....”

Within an hour the merchant, stroking his big overcoat neatly down, and
hooking up his jacket, with the agreement in his pocket, seated himself
in his tightly covered trap, and drove homewards.

“Ugh, these gentlefolks!” he said to the clerk. “They—they’re a nice
lot!”

“That’s so,” responded the clerk, handing him the reins and buttoning
the leather apron. “But I can congratulate you on the purchase, Mihail
Ignatitch?”

“Well, well....”


Chapter 17

Stepan Arkadyevitch went upstairs with his pocket bulging with notes,
which the merchant had paid him for three months in advance. The
business of the forest was over, the money in his pocket; their
shooting had been excellent, and Stepan Arkadyevitch was in the
happiest frame of mind, and so he felt specially anxious to dissipate
the ill-humor that had come upon Levin. He wanted to finish the day at
supper as pleasantly as it had been begun.

Levin certainly was out of humor, and in spite of all his desire to be
affectionate and cordial to his charming visitor, he could not control
his mood. The intoxication of the news that Kitty was not married had
gradually begun to work upon him.

Kitty was not married, but ill, and ill from love for a man who had
slighted her. This slight, as it were, rebounded upon him. Vronsky had
slighted her, and she had slighted him, Levin. Consequently Vronsky had
the right to despise Levin, and therefore he was his enemy. But all
this Levin did not think out. He vaguely felt that there was something
in it insulting to him, and he was not angry now at what had disturbed
him, but he fell foul of everything that presented itself. The stupid
sale of the forest, the fraud practiced upon Oblonsky and concluded in
his house, exasperated him.

“Well, finished?” he said, meeting Stepan Arkadyevitch upstairs. “Would
you like supper?”

“Well, I wouldn’t say no to it. What an appetite I get in the country!
Wonderful! Why didn’t you offer Ryabinin something?”

“Oh, damn him!”

“Still, how you do treat him!” said Oblonsky. “You didn’t even shake
hands with him. Why not shake hands with him?”

“Because I don’t shake hands with a waiter, and a waiter’s a hundred
times better than he is.”

“What a reactionist you are, really! What about the amalgamation of
classes?” said Oblonsky.

“Anyone who likes amalgamating is welcome to it, but it sickens me.”

“You’re a regular reactionist, I see.”

“Really, I have never considered what I am. I am Konstantin Levin, and
nothing else.”

“And Konstantin Levin very much out of temper,” said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, smiling.

“Yes, I am out of temper, and do you know why? Because—excuse me—of
your stupid sale....”

Stepan Arkadyevitch frowned good-humoredly, like one who feels himself
teased and attacked for no fault of his own.

“Come, enough about it!” he said. “When did anybody ever sell anything
without being told immediately after the sale, ‘It was worth much
more’? But when one wants to sell, no one will give anything.... No, I
see you’ve a grudge against that unlucky Ryabinin.”

“Maybe I have. And do you know why? You’ll say again that I’m a
reactionist, or some other terrible word; but all the same it does
annoy and anger me to see on all sides the impoverishing of the
nobility to which I belong, and, in spite of the amalgamation of
classes, I’m glad to belong. And their impoverishment is not due to
extravagance—that would be nothing; living in good style—that’s the
proper thing for noblemen; it’s only the nobles who know how to do it.
Now the peasants about us buy land, and I don’t mind that. The
gentleman does nothing, while the peasant works and supplants the idle
man. That’s as it ought to be. And I’m very glad for the peasant. But I
do mind seeing the process of impoverishment from a sort of—I don’t
know what to call it—innocence. Here a Polish speculator bought for
half its value a magnificent estate from a young lady who lives in
Nice. And there a merchant will get three acres of land, worth ten
roubles, as security for the loan of one rouble. Here, for no kind of
reason, you’ve made that rascal a present of thirty thousand roubles.”

“Well, what should I have done? Counted every tree?”

“Of course, they must be counted. You didn’t count them, but Ryabinin
did. Ryabinin’s children will have means of livelihood and education,
while yours maybe will not!”

“Well, you must excuse me, but there’s something mean in this counting.
We have our business and they have theirs, and they must make their
profit. Anyway, the thing’s done, and there’s an end of it. And here
come some poached eggs, my favorite dish. And Agafea Mihalovna will
give us that marvelous herb-brandy....”

Stepan Arkadyevitch sat down at the table and began joking with Agafea
Mihalovna, assuring her that it was long since he had tasted such a
dinner and such a supper.

“Well, you do praise it, anyway,” said Agafea Mihalovna, “but
Konstantin Dmitrievitch, give him what you will—a crust of bread—he’ll
eat it and walk away.”

Though Levin tried to control himself, he was gloomy and silent. He
wanted to put one question to Stepan Arkadyevitch, but he could not
bring himself to the point, and could not find the words or the moment
in which to put it. Stepan Arkadyevitch had gone down to his room,
undressed, again washed, and attired in a nightshirt with goffered
frills, he had got into bed, but Levin still lingered in his room,
talking of various trifling matters, and not daring to ask what he
wanted to know.

“How wonderfully they make this soap,” he said gazing at a piece of
soap he was handling, which Agafea Mihalovna had put ready for the
visitor but Oblonsky had not used. “Only look; why, it’s a work of
art.”

“Yes, everything’s brought to such a pitch of perfection nowadays,”
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, with a moist and blissful yawn. “The theater,
for instance, and the entertainments ... a—a—a!” he yawned. “The
electric light everywhere ... a—a—a!”

“Yes, the electric light,” said Levin. “Yes. Oh, and where’s Vronsky
now?” he asked suddenly, laying down the soap.

“Vronsky?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, checking his yawn; “he’s in
Petersburg. He left soon after you did, and he’s not once been in
Moscow since. And do you know, Kostya, I’ll tell you the truth,” he
went on, leaning his elbow on the table, and propping on his hand his
handsome ruddy face, in which his moist, good-natured, sleepy eyes
shone like stars. “It’s your own fault. You took fright at the sight of
your rival. But, as I told you at the time, I couldn’t say which had
the better chance. Why didn’t you fight it out? I told you at the time
that....” He yawned inwardly, without opening his mouth.

“Does he know, or doesn’t he, that I did make an offer?” Levin
wondered, gazing at him. “Yes, there’s something humbugging, diplomatic
in his face,” and feeling he was blushing, he looked Stepan
Arkadyevitch straight in the face without speaking.

“If there was anything on her side at the time, it was nothing but a
superficial attraction,” pursued Oblonsky. “His being such a perfect
aristocrat, don’t you know, and his future position in society, had an
influence not with her, but with her mother.”

Levin scowled. The humiliation of his rejection stung him to the heart,
as though it were a fresh wound he had only just received. But he was
at home, and the walls of home are a support.

“Stay, stay,” he began, interrupting Oblonsky. “You talk of his being
an aristocrat. But allow me to ask what it consists in, that
aristocracy of Vronsky or of anybody else, beside which I can be looked
down upon? You consider Vronsky an aristocrat, but I don’t. A man whose
father crawled up from nothing at all by intrigue, and whose mother—God
knows whom she wasn’t mixed up with.... No, excuse me, but I consider
myself aristocratic, and people like me, who can point back in the past
to three or four honorable generations of their family, of the highest
degree of breeding (talent and intellect, of course that’s another
matter), and have never curried favor with anyone, never depended on
anyone for anything, like my father and my grandfather. And I know many
such. You think it mean of me to count the trees in my forest, while
you make Ryabinin a present of thirty thousand; but you get rents from
your lands and I don’t know what, while I don’t and so I prize what’s
come to me from my ancestors or been won by hard work.... We are
aristocrats, and not those who can only exist by favor of the powerful
of this world, and who can be bought for twopence halfpenny.”

“Well, but whom are you attacking? I agree with you,” said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, sincerely and genially; though he was aware that in the
class of those who could be bought for twopence halfpenny Levin was
reckoning him too. Levin’s warmth gave him genuine pleasure. “Whom are
you attacking? Though a good deal is not true that you say about
Vronsky, but I won’t talk about that. I tell you straight out, if I
were you, I should go back with me to Moscow, and....”

“No; I don’t know whether you know it or not, but I don’t care. And I
tell you—I did make an offer and was rejected, and Katerina
Alexandrovna is nothing now to me but a painful and humiliating
reminiscence.”

“What ever for? What nonsense!”

“But we won’t talk about it. Please forgive me, if I’ve been nasty,”
said Levin. Now that he had opened his heart, he became as he had been
in the morning. “You’re not angry with me, Stiva? Please don’t be
angry,” he said, and smiling, he took his hand.

“Of course not; not a bit, and no reason to be. I’m glad we’ve spoken
openly. And do you know, stand-shooting in the morning is unusually
good—why not go? I couldn’t sleep the night anyway, but I might go
straight from shooting to the station.”

“Capital.”


Chapter 18

Although all Vronsky’s inner life was absorbed in his passion, his
external life unalterably and inevitably followed along the old
accustomed lines of his social and regimental ties and interests. The
interests of his regiment took an important place in Vronsky’s life,
both because he was fond of the regiment, and because the regiment was
fond of him. They were not only fond of Vronsky in his regiment, they
respected him too, and were proud of him; proud that this man, with his
immense wealth, his brilliant education and abilities, and the path
open before him to every kind of success, distinction, and ambition,
had disregarded all that, and of all the interests of life had the
interests of his regiment and his comrades nearest to his heart.
Vronsky was aware of his comrades’ view of him, and in addition to his
liking for the life, he felt bound to keep up that reputation.

It need not be said that he did not speak of his love to any of his
comrades, nor did he betray his secret even in the wildest drinking
bouts (though indeed he was never so drunk as to lose all control of
himself). And he shut up any of his thoughtless comrades who attempted
to allude to his connection. But in spite of that, his love was known
to all the town; everyone guessed with more or less confidence at his
relations with Madame Karenina. The majority of the younger men envied
him for just what was the most irksome factor in his love—the exalted
position of Karenin, and the consequent publicity of their connection
in society.

The greater number of the young women, who envied Anna and had long
been weary of hearing her called _virtuous_, rejoiced at the
fulfillment of their predictions, and were only waiting for a decisive
turn in public opinion to fall upon her with all the weight of their
scorn. They were already making ready their handfuls of mud to fling at
her when the right moment arrived. The greater number of the
middle-aged people and certain great personages were displeased at the
prospect of the impending scandal in society.

Vronsky’s mother, on hearing of his connection, was at first pleased at
it, because nothing to her mind gave such a finishing touch to a
brilliant young man as a _liaison_ in the highest society; she was
pleased, too, that Madame Karenina, who had so taken her fancy, and had
talked so much of her son, was, after all, just like all other pretty
and well-bred women,—at least according to the Countess Vronskaya’s
ideas. But she had heard of late that her son had refused a position
offered him of great importance to his career, simply in order to
remain in the regiment, where he could be constantly seeing Madame
Karenina. She learned that great personages were displeased with him on
this account, and she changed her opinion. She was vexed, too, that
from all she could learn of this connection it was not that brilliant,
graceful, worldly _liaison_ which she would have welcomed, but a sort
of Wertherish, desperate passion, so she was told, which might well
lead him into imprudence. She had not seen him since his abrupt
departure from Moscow, and she sent her elder son to bid him come to
see her.

This elder son, too, was displeased with his younger brother. He did
not distinguish what sort of love his might be, big or little,
passionate or passionless, lasting or passing (he kept a ballet girl
himself, though he was the father of a family, so he was lenient in
these matters), but he knew that this love affair was viewed with
displeasure by those whom it was necessary to please, and therefore he
did not approve of his brother’s conduct.

Besides the service and society, Vronsky had another great
interest—horses; he was passionately fond of horses.

That year races and a steeplechase had been arranged for the officers.
Vronsky had put his name down, bought a thoroughbred English mare, and
in spite of his love affair, he was looking forward to the races with
intense, though reserved, excitement....

These two passions did not interfere with one another. On the contrary,
he needed occupation and distraction quite apart from his love, so as
to recruit and rest himself from the violent emotions that agitated
him.


Chapter 19

On the day of the races at Krasnoe Selo, Vronsky had come earlier than
usual to eat beefsteak in the common messroom of the regiment. He had
no need to be strict with himself, as he had very quickly been brought
down to the required light weight; but still he had to avoid gaining
flesh, and so he eschewed farinaceous and sweet dishes. He sat with his
coat unbuttoned over a white waistcoat, resting both elbows on the
table, and while waiting for the steak he had ordered he looked at a
French novel that lay open on his plate. He was only looking at the
book to avoid conversation with the officers coming in and out; he was
thinking.

He was thinking of Anna’s promise to see him that day after the races.
But he had not seen her for three days, and as her husband had just
returned from abroad, he did not know whether she would be able to meet
him today or not, and he did not know how to find out. He had had his
last interview with her at his cousin Betsy’s summer villa. He visited
the Karenins’ summer villa as rarely as possible. Now he wanted to go
there, and he pondered the question how to do it.

“Of course I shall say Betsy has sent me to ask whether she’s coming to
the races. Of course, I’ll go,” he decided, lifting his head from the
book. And as he vividly pictured the happiness of seeing her, his face
lighted up.

“Send to my house, and tell them to have out the carriage and three
horses as quick as they can,” he said to the servant, who handed him
the steak on a hot silver dish, and moving the dish up he began eating.

From the billiard room next door came the sound of balls knocking, of
talk and laughter. Two officers appeared at the entrance-door: one, a
young fellow, with a feeble, delicate face, who had lately joined the
regiment from the Corps of Pages; the other, a plump, elderly officer,
with a bracelet on his wrist, and little eyes, lost in fat.

Vronsky glanced at them, frowned, and looking down at his book as
though he had not noticed them, he proceeded to eat and read at the
same time.

“What? Fortifying yourself for your work?” said the plump officer,
sitting down beside him.

“As you see,” responded Vronsky, knitting his brows, wiping his mouth,
and not looking at the officer.

“So you’re not afraid of getting fat?” said the latter, turning a chair
round for the young officer.

“What?” said Vronsky angrily, making a wry face of disgust, and showing
his even teeth.

“You’re not afraid of getting fat?”

“Waiter, sherry!” said Vronsky, without replying, and moving the book
to the other side of him, he went on reading.

The plump officer took up the list of wines and turned to the young
officer.

“You choose what we’re to drink,” he said, handing him the card, and
looking at him.

“Rhine wine, please,” said the young officer, stealing a timid glance
at Vronsky, and trying to pull his scarcely visible mustache. Seeing
that Vronsky did not turn round, the young officer got up.

“Let’s go into the billiard room,” he said.

The plump officer rose submissively, and they moved towards the door.

At that moment there walked into the room the tall and well-built
Captain Yashvin. Nodding with an air of lofty contempt to the two
officers, he went up to Vronsky.

“Ah! here he is!” he cried, bringing his big hand down heavily on his
epaulet. Vronsky looked round angrily, but his face lighted up
immediately with his characteristic expression of genial and manly
serenity.

“That’s it, Alexey,” said the captain, in his loud baritone. “You must
just eat a mouthful, now, and drink only one tiny glass.”

“Oh, I’m not hungry.”

“There go the inseparables,” Yashvin dropped, glancing sarcastically at
the two officers who were at that instant leaving the room. And he bent
his long legs, swathed in tight riding breeches, and sat down in the
chair, too low for him, so that his knees were cramped up in a sharp
angle.

“Why didn’t you turn up at the Red Theater yesterday? Numerova wasn’t
at all bad. Where were you?”

“I was late at the Tverskoys’,” said Vronsky.

“Ah!” responded Yashvin.

Yashvin, a gambler and a rake, a man not merely without moral
principles, but of immoral principles, Yashvin was Vronsky’s greatest
friend in the regiment. Vronsky liked him both for his exceptional
physical strength, which he showed for the most part by being able to
drink like a fish, and do without sleep without being in the slightest
degree affected by it; and for his great strength of character, which
he showed in his relations with his comrades and superior officers,
commanding both fear and respect, and also at cards, when he would play
for tens of thousands and however much he might have drunk, always with
such skill and decision that he was reckoned the best player in the
English Club. Vronsky respected and liked Yashvin particularly because
he felt Yashvin liked him, not for his name and his money, but for
himself. And of all men he was the only one with whom Vronsky would
have liked to speak of his love. He felt that Yashvin, in spite of his
apparent contempt for every sort of feeling, was the only man who
could, so he fancied, comprehend the intense passion which now filled
his whole life. Moreover, he felt certain that Yashvin, as it was, took
no delight in gossip and scandal, and interpreted his feeling rightly,
that is to say, knew and believed that this passion was not a jest, not
a pastime, but something more serious and important.

Vronsky had never spoken to him of his passion, but he was aware that
he knew all about it, and that he put the right interpretation on it,
and he was glad to see that in his eyes.

“Ah! yes,” he said, to the announcement that Vronsky had been at the
Tverskoys’; and his black eyes shining, he plucked at his left
mustache, and began twisting it into his mouth, a bad habit he had.

“Well, and what did you do yesterday? Win anything?” asked Vronsky.

“Eight thousand. But three don’t count; he won’t pay up.”

“Oh, then you can afford to lose over me,” said Vronsky, laughing.
(Yashvin had bet heavily on Vronsky in the races.)

“No chance of my losing. Mahotin’s the only one that’s risky.”

And the conversation passed to forecasts of the coming race, the only
thing Vronsky could think of just now.

“Come along, I’ve finished,” said Vronsky, and getting up he went to
the door. Yashvin got up too, stretching his long legs and his long
back.

“It’s too early for me to dine, but I must have a drink. I’ll come
along directly. Hi, wine!” he shouted, in his rich voice, that always
rang out so loudly at drill, and set the windows shaking now.

“No, all right,” he shouted again immediately after. “You’re going
home, so I’ll go with you.”

And he walked out with Vronsky.


Chapter 20

Vronsky was staying in a roomy, clean, Finnish hut, divided into two by
a partition. Petritsky lived with him in camp too. Petritsky was asleep
when Vronsky and Yashvin came into the hut.

“Get up, don’t go on sleeping,” said Yashvin, going behind the
partition and giving Petritsky, who was lying with ruffled hair and
with his nose in the pillow, a prod on the shoulder.

Petritsky jumped up suddenly onto his knees and looked round.

“Your brother’s been here,” he said to Vronsky. “He waked me up, damn
him, and said he’d look in again.” And pulling up the rug he flung
himself back on the pillow. “Oh, do shut up, Yashvin!” he said, getting
furious with Yashvin, who was pulling the rug off him. “Shut up!” He
turned over and opened his eyes. “You’d better tell me what to drink;
such a nasty taste in my mouth, that....”

“Brandy’s better than anything,” boomed Yashvin. “Tereshtchenko! brandy
for your master and cucumbers,” he shouted, obviously taking pleasure
in the sound of his own voice.

“Brandy, do you think? Eh?” queried Petritsky, blinking and rubbing his
eyes. “And you’ll drink something? All right then, we’ll have a drink
together! Vronsky, have a drink?” said Petritsky, getting up and
wrapping the tiger-skin rug round him. He went to the door of the
partition wall, raised his hands, and hummed in French, “There was a
king in Thule.” “Vronsky, will you have a drink?”

“Go along,” said Vronsky, putting on the coat his valet handed to him.

“Where are you off to?” asked Yashvin. “Oh, here are your three
horses,” he added, seeing the carriage drive up.

“To the stables, and I’ve got to see Bryansky, too, about the horses,”
said Vronsky.

Vronsky had as a fact promised to call at Bryansky’s, some eight miles
from Peterhof, and to bring him some money owing for some horses; and
he hoped to have time to get that in too. But his comrades were at once
aware that he was not only going there.

Petritsky, still humming, winked and made a pout with his lips, as
though he would say: “Oh, yes, we know your Bryansky.”

“Mind you’re not late!” was Yashvin’s only comment; and to change the
conversation: “How’s my roan? is he doing all right?” he inquired,
looking out of the window at the middle one of the three horses, which
he had sold Vronsky.

“Stop!” cried Petritsky to Vronsky as he was just going out. “Your
brother left a letter and a note for you. Wait a bit; where are they?”

Vronsky stopped.

“Well, where are they?”

“Where are they? That’s just the question!” said Petritsky solemnly,
moving his forefinger upwards from his nose.

“Come, tell me; this is silly!” said Vronsky smiling.

“I have not lighted the fire. Here somewhere about.”

“Come, enough fooling! Where is the letter?”

“No, I’ve forgotten really. Or was it a dream? Wait a bit, wait a bit!
But what’s the use of getting in a rage. If you’d drunk four bottles
yesterday as I did you’d forget where you were lying. Wait a bit, I’ll
remember!”

Petritsky went behind the partition and lay down on his bed.

“Wait a bit! This was how I was lying, and this was how he was
standing. Yes—yes—yes.... Here it is!”—and Petritsky pulled a letter
out from under the mattress, where he had hidden it.

Vronsky took the letter and his brother’s note. It was the letter he
was expecting—from his mother, reproaching him for not having been to
see her—and the note was from his brother to say that he must have a
little talk with him. Vronsky knew that it was all about the same
thing. “What business is it of theirs!” thought Vronsky, and crumpling
up the letters he thrust them between the buttons of his coat so as to
read them carefully on the road. In the porch of the hut he was met by
two officers; one of his regiment and one of another.

Vronsky’s quarters were always a meeting place for all the officers.

“Where are you off to?”

“I must go to Peterhof.”

“Has the mare come from Tsarskoe?”

“Yes, but I’ve not seen her yet.”

“They say Mahotin’s Gladiator’s lame.”

“Nonsense! But however are you going to race in this mud?” said the
other.

“Here are my saviors!” cried Petritsky, seeing them come in. Before him
stood the orderly with a tray of brandy and salted cucumbers. “Here’s
Yashvin ordering me to drink a pick-me-up.”

“Well, you did give it to us yesterday,” said one of those who had come
in; “you didn’t let us get a wink of sleep all night.”

“Oh, didn’t we make a pretty finish!” said Petritsky. “Volkov climbed
onto the roof and began telling us how sad he was. I said: ‘Let’s have
music, the funeral march!’ He fairly dropped asleep on the roof over
the funeral march.”

“Drink it up; you positively must drink the brandy, and then seltzer
water and a lot of lemon,” said Yashvin, standing over Petritsky like a
mother making a child take medicine, “and then a little champagne—just
a small bottle.”

“Come, there’s some sense in that. Stop a bit, Vronsky. We’ll all have
a drink.”

“No; good-bye all of you. I’m not going to drink today.”

“Why, are you gaining weight? All right, then we must have it alone.
Give us the seltzer water and lemon.”

“Vronsky!” shouted someone when he was already outside.

“Well?”

“You’d better get your hair cut, it’ll weigh you down, especially at
the top.”

Vronsky was in fact beginning, prematurely, to get a little bald. He
laughed gaily, showing his even teeth, and pulling his cap over the
thin place, went out and got into his carriage.

“To the stables!” he said, and was just pulling out the letters to read
them through, but he thought better of it, and put off reading them so
as not to distract his attention before looking at the mare. “Later!”


Chapter 21

The temporary stable, a wooden shed, had been put up close to the race
course, and there his mare was to have been taken the previous day. He
had not yet seen her there.

During the last few days he had not ridden her out for exercise
himself, but had put her in the charge of the trainer, and so now he
positively did not know in what condition his mare had arrived
yesterday and was today. He had scarcely got out of his carriage when
his groom, the so-called “stable boy,” recognizing the carriage some
way off, called the trainer. A dry-looking Englishman, in high boots
and a short jacket, clean-shaven, except for a tuft below his chin,
came to meet him, walking with the uncouth gait of jockey, turning his
elbows out and swaying from side to side.

“Well, how’s Frou-Frou?” Vronsky asked in English.

“All right, sir,” the Englishman’s voice responded somewhere in the
inside of his throat. “Better not go in,” he added, touching his hat.
“I’ve put a muzzle on her, and the mare’s fidgety. Better not go in,
it’ll excite the mare.”

“No, I’m going in. I want to look at her.”

“Come along, then,” said the Englishman, frowning, and speaking with
his mouth shut, and, with swinging elbows, he went on in front with his
disjointed gait.

They went into the little yard in front of the shed. A stable boy,
spruce and smart in his holiday attire, met them with a broom in his
hand, and followed them. In the shed there were five horses in their
separate stalls, and Vronsky knew that his chief rival, Gladiator, a
very tall chestnut horse, had been brought there, and must be standing
among them. Even more than his mare, Vronsky longed to see Gladiator,
whom he had never seen. But he knew that by the etiquette of the race
course it was not merely impossible for him to see the horse, but
improper even to ask questions about him. Just as he was passing along
the passage, the boy opened the door into the second horse-box on the
left, and Vronsky caught a glimpse of a big chestnut horse with white
legs. He knew that this was Gladiator, but, with the feeling of a man
turning away from the sight of another man’s open letter, he turned
round and went into Frou-Frou’s stall.

“The horse is here belonging to Mak... Mak... I never can say the
name,” said the Englishman, over his shoulder, pointing his big finger
and dirty nail towards Gladiator’s stall.

“Mahotin? Yes, he’s my most serious rival,” said Vronsky.

“If you were riding him,” said the Englishman, “I’d bet on you.”

“Frou-Frou’s more nervous; he’s stronger,” said Vronsky, smiling at the
compliment to his riding.

“In a steeplechase it all depends on riding and on pluck,” said the
Englishman.

Of pluck—that is, energy and courage—Vronsky did not merely feel that
he had enough; what was of far more importance, he was firmly convinced
that no one in the world could have more of this “pluck” than he had.

“Don’t you think I want more thinning down?”

“Oh, no,” answered the Englishman. “Please, don’t speak loud. The
mare’s fidgety,” he added, nodding towards the horse-box, before which
they were standing, and from which came the sound of restless stamping
in the straw.

He opened the door, and Vronsky went into the horse-box, dimly lighted
by one little window. In the horse-box stood a dark bay mare, with a
muzzle on, picking at the fresh straw with her hoofs. Looking round him
in the twilight of the horse-box, Vronsky unconsciously took in once
more in a comprehensive glance all the points of his favorite mare.
Frou-Frou was a beast of medium size, not altogether free from
reproach, from a breeder’s point of view. She was small-boned all over;
though her chest was extremely prominent in front, it was narrow. Her
hind-quarters were a little drooping, and in her fore-legs, and still
more in her hind-legs, there was a noticeable curvature. The muscles of
both hind- and fore-legs were not very thick; but across her shoulders
the mare was exceptionally broad, a peculiarity specially striking now
that she was lean from training. The bones of her legs below the knees
looked no thicker than a finger from in front, but were extraordinarily
thick seen from the side. She looked altogether, except across the
shoulders, as it were, pinched in at the sides and pressed out in
depth. But she had in the highest degree the quality that makes all
defects forgotten: that quality was _blood_, the blood _that tells_, as
the English expression has it. The muscles stood up sharply under the
network of sinews, covered with the delicate, mobile skin, soft as
satin, and they were hard as bone. Her clean-cut head, with prominent,
bright, spirited eyes, broadened out at the open nostrils, that showed
the red blood in the cartilage within. About all her figure, and
especially her head, there was a certain expression of energy, and, at
the same time, of softness. She was one of those creatures which seem
only not to speak because the mechanism of their mouth does not allow
them to.

To Vronsky, at any rate, it seemed that she understood all he felt at
that moment, looking at her.

Directly Vronsky went towards her, she drew in a deep breath, and,
turning back her prominent eye till the white looked bloodshot, she
started at the approaching figures from the opposite side, shaking her
muzzle, and shifting lightly from one leg to the other.

“There, you see how fidgety she is,” said the Englishman.

“There, darling! There!” said Vronsky, going up to the mare and
speaking soothingly to her.

But the nearer he came, the more excited she grew. Only when he stood
by her head, she was suddenly quieter, while the muscles quivered under
her soft, delicate coat. Vronsky patted her strong neck, straightened
over her sharp withers a stray lock of her mane that had fallen on the
other side, and moved his face near her dilated nostrils, transparent
as a bat’s wing. She drew a loud breath and snorted out through her
tense nostrils, started, pricked up her sharp ear, and put out her
strong, black lip towards Vronsky, as though she would nip hold of his
sleeve. But remembering the muzzle, she shook it and again began
restlessly stamping one after the other her shapely legs.

“Quiet, darling, quiet!” he said, patting her again over her
hind-quarters; and with a glad sense that his mare was in the best
possible condition, he went out of the horse-box.

The mare’s excitement had infected Vronsky. He felt that his heart was
throbbing, and that he, too, like the mare, longed to move, to bite; it
was both dreadful and delicious.

“Well, I rely on you, then,” he said to the Englishman; “half-past six
on the ground.”

“All right,” said the Englishman. “Oh, where are you going, my lord?”
he asked suddenly, using the title “my lord,” which he had scarcely
ever used before.

Vronsky in amazement raised his head, and stared, as he knew how to
stare, not into the Englishman’s eyes, but at his forehead, astounded
at the impertinence of his question. But realizing that in asking this
the Englishman had been looking at him not as an employer, but as a
jockey, he answered:

“I’ve got to go to Bryansky’s; I shall be home within an hour.”

“How often I’m asked that question today!” he said to himself, and he
blushed, a thing which rarely happened to him. The Englishman looked
gravely at him; and, as though he, too, knew where Vronsky was going,
he added:

“The great thing’s to keep quiet before a race,” said he; “don’t get
out of temper or upset about anything.”

“All right,” answered Vronsky, smiling; and jumping into his carriage,
he told the man to drive to Peterhof.

Before he had driven many paces away, the dark clouds that had been
threatening rain all day broke, and there was a heavy downpour of rain.

“What a pity!” thought Vronsky, putting up the roof of the carriage.
“It was muddy before, now it will be a perfect swamp.” As he sat in
solitude in the closed carriage, he took out his mother’s letter and
his brother’s note, and read them through.

Yes, it was the same thing over and over again. Everyone, his mother,
his brother, everyone thought fit to interfere in the affairs of his
heart. This interference aroused in him a feeling of angry hatred—a
feeling he had rarely known before. “What business is it of theirs? Why
does everybody feel called upon to concern himself about me? And why do
they worry me so? Just because they see that this is something they
can’t understand. If it were a common, vulgar, worldly intrigue, they
would have left me alone. They feel that this is something different,
that this is not a mere pastime, that this woman is dearer to me than
life. And this is incomprehensible, and that’s why it annoys them.
Whatever our destiny is or may be, we have made it ourselves, and we do
not complain of it,” he said, in the word _we_ linking himself with
Anna. “No, they must needs teach us how to live. They haven’t an idea
of what happiness is; they don’t know that without our love, for us
there is neither happiness nor unhappiness—no life at all,” he thought.

He was angry with all of them for their interference just because he
felt in his soul that they, all these people, were right. He felt that
the love that bound him to Anna was not a momentary impulse, which
would pass, as worldly intrigues do pass, leaving no other traces in
the life of either but pleasant or unpleasant memories. He felt all the
torture of his own and her position, all the difficulty there was for
them, conspicuous as they were in the eye of all the world, in
concealing their love, in lying and deceiving; and in lying, deceiving,
feigning, and continually thinking of others, when the passion that
united them was so intense that they were both oblivious of everything
else but their love.

He vividly recalled all the constantly recurring instances of
inevitable necessity for lying and deceit, which were so against his
natural bent. He recalled particularly vividly the shame he had more
than once detected in her at this necessity for lying and deceit. And
he experienced the strange feeling that had sometimes come upon him
since his secret love for Anna. This was a feeling of loathing for
something—whether for Alexey Alexandrovitch, or for himself, or for the
whole world, he could not have said. But he always drove away this
strange feeling. Now, too, he shook it off and continued the thread of
his thoughts.

“Yes, she was unhappy before, but proud and at peace; and now she
cannot be at peace and feel secure in her dignity, though she does not
show it. Yes, we must put an end to it,” he decided.

And for the first time the idea clearly presented itself that it was
essential to put an end to this false position, and the sooner the
better. “Throw up everything, she and I, and hide ourselves somewhere
alone with our love,” he said to himself.


Chapter 22

The rain did not last long, and by the time Vronsky arrived, his
shaft-horse trotting at full speed and dragging the trace-horses
galloping through the mud, with their reins hanging loose, the sun had
peeped out again, the roofs of the summer villas and the old limetrees
in the gardens on both sides of the principal streets sparkled with wet
brilliance, and from the twigs came a pleasant drip and from the roofs
rushing streams of water. He thought no more of the shower spoiling the
race course, but was rejoicing now that—thanks to the rain—he would be
sure to find her at home and alone, as he knew that Alexey
Alexandrovitch, who had lately returned from a foreign watering place,
had not moved from Petersburg.

Hoping to find her alone, Vronsky alighted, as he always did, to avoid
attracting attention, before crossing the bridge, and walked to the
house. He did not go up the steps to the street door, but went into the
court.

“Has your master come?” he asked a gardener.

“No, sir. The mistress is at home. But will you please go to the front
door; there are servants there,” the gardener answered. “They’ll open
the door.”

“No, I’ll go in from the garden.”

And feeling satisfied that she was alone, and wanting to take her by
surprise, since he had not promised to be there today, and she would
certainly not expect him to come before the races, he walked, holding
his sword and stepping cautiously over the sandy path, bordered with
flowers, to the terrace that looked out upon the garden. Vronsky forgot
now all that he had thought on the way of the hardships and
difficulties of their position. He thought of nothing but that he would
see her directly, not in imagination, but living, all of her, as she
was in reality. He was just going in, stepping on his whole foot so as
not to creak, up the worn steps of the terrace, when he suddenly
remembered what he always forgot, and what caused the most torturing
side of his relations with her, her son with his questioning—hostile,
as he fancied—eyes.

This boy was more often than anyone else a check upon their freedom.
When he was present, both Vronsky and Anna did not merely avoid
speaking of anything that they could not have repeated before everyone;
they did not even allow themselves to refer by hints to anything the
boy did not understand. They had made no agreement about this, it had
settled itself. They would have felt it wounding themselves to deceive
the child. In his presence they talked like acquaintances. But in spite
of this caution, Vronsky often saw the child’s intent, bewildered
glance fixed upon him, and a strange shyness, uncertainty, at one time
friendliness, at another, coldness and reserve, in the boy’s manner to
him; as though the child felt that between this man and his mother
there existed some important bond, the significance of which he could
not understand.

As a fact, the boy did feel that he could not understand this relation,
and he tried painfully, and was not able to make clear to himself what
feeling he ought to have for this man. With a child’s keen instinct for
every manifestation of feeling, he saw distinctly that his father, his
governess, his nurse,—all did not merely dislike Vronsky, but looked on
him with horror and aversion, though they never said anything about
him, while his mother looked on him as her greatest friend.

“What does it mean? Who is he? How ought I to love him? If I don’t
know, it’s my fault; either I’m stupid or a naughty boy,” thought the
child. And this was what caused his dubious, inquiring, sometimes
hostile, expression, and the shyness and uncertainty which Vronsky
found so irksome. This child’s presence always and infallibly called up
in Vronsky that strange feeling of inexplicable loathing which he had
experienced of late. This child’s presence called up both in Vronsky
and in Anna a feeling akin to the feeling of a sailor who sees by the
compass that the direction in which he is swiftly moving is far from
the right one, but that to arrest his motion is not in his power, that
every instant is carrying him further and further away, and that to
admit to himself his deviation from the right direction is the same as
admitting his certain ruin.

This child, with his innocent outlook upon life, was the compass that
showed them the point to which they had departed from what they knew,
but did not want to know.

This time Seryozha was not at home, and she was completely alone. She
was sitting on the terrace waiting for the return of her son, who had
gone out for his walk and been caught in the rain. She had sent a
manservant and a maid out to look for him. Dressed in a white gown,
deeply embroidered, she was sitting in a corner of the terrace behind
some flowers, and did not hear him. Bending her curly black head, she
pressed her forehead against a cool watering pot that stood on the
parapet, and both her lovely hands, with the rings he knew so well,
clasped the pot. The beauty of her whole figure, her head, her neck,
her hands, struck Vronsky every time as something new and unexpected.
He stood still, gazing at her in ecstasy. But, directly he would have
made a step to come nearer to her, she was aware of his presence,
pushed away the watering pot, and turned her flushed face towards him.

“What’s the matter? You are ill?” he said to her in French, going up to
her. He would have run to her, but remembering that there might be
spectators, he looked round towards the balcony door, and reddened a
little, as he always reddened, feeling that he had to be afraid and be
on his guard.

“No, I’m quite well,” she said, getting up and pressing his
outstretched hand tightly. “I did not expect ... thee.”

“Mercy! what cold hands!” he said.

“You startled me,” she said. “I’m alone, and expecting Seryozha; he’s
out for a walk; they’ll come in from this side.”

But, in spite of her efforts to be calm, her lips were quivering.

“Forgive me for coming, but I couldn’t pass the day without seeing
you,” he went on, speaking French, as he always did to avoid using the
stiff Russian plural form, so impossibly frigid between them, and the
dangerously intimate singular.

“Forgive you? I’m so glad!”

“But you’re ill or worried,” he went on, not letting go her hands and
bending over her. “What were you thinking of?”

“Always the same thing,” she said, with a smile.

She spoke the truth. If ever at any moment she had been asked what she
was thinking of, she could have answered truly: of the same thing, of
her happiness and her unhappiness. She was thinking, just when he came
upon her, of this: why was it, she wondered, that to others, to Betsy
(she knew of her secret connection with Tushkevitch) it was all easy,
while to her it was such torture? Today this thought gained special
poignancy from certain other considerations. She asked him about the
races. He answered her questions, and, seeing that she was agitated,
trying to calm her, he began telling her in the simplest tone the
details of his preparations for the races.

“Tell him or not tell him?” she thought, looking into his quiet,
affectionate eyes. “He is so happy, so absorbed in his races that he
won’t understand as he ought, he won’t understand all the gravity of
this fact to us.”

“But you haven’t told me what you were thinking of when I came in,” he
said, interrupting his narrative; “please tell me!”

She did not answer, and, bending her head a little, she looked
inquiringly at him from under her brows, her eyes shining under their
long lashes. Her hand shook as it played with a leaf she had picked. He
saw it, and his face expressed that utter subjection, that slavish
devotion, which had done so much to win her.

“I see something has happened. Do you suppose I can be at peace,
knowing you have a trouble I am not sharing? Tell me, for God’s sake,”
he repeated imploringly.

“Yes, I shan’t be able to forgive him if he does not realize all the
gravity of it. Better not tell; why put him to the proof?” she thought,
still staring at him in the same way, and feeling the hand that held
the leaf was trembling more and more.

“For God’s sake!” he repeated, taking her hand.

“Shall I tell you?”

“Yes, yes, yes....”

“I’m with child,” she said, softly and deliberately. The leaf in her
hand shook more violently, but she did not take her eyes off him,
watching how he would take it. He turned white, would have said
something, but stopped; he dropped her hand, and his head sank on his
breast. “Yes, he realizes all the gravity of it,” she thought, and
gratefully she pressed his hand.

But she was mistaken in thinking he realized the gravity of the fact as
she, a woman, realized it. On hearing it, he felt come upon him with
tenfold intensity that strange feeling of loathing of someone. But at
the same time, he felt that the turning-point he had been longing for
had come now; that it was impossible to go on concealing things from
her husband, and it was inevitable in one way or another that they
should soon put an end to their unnatural position. But, besides that,
her emotion physically affected him in the same way. He looked at her
with a look of submissive tenderness, kissed her hand, got up, and, in
silence, paced up and down the terrace.

“Yes,” he said, going up to her resolutely. “Neither you nor I have
looked on our relations as a passing amusement, and now our fate is
sealed. It is absolutely necessary to put an end”—he looked round as he
spoke—“to the deception in which we are living.”

“Put an end? How put an end, Alexey?” she said softly.

She was calmer now, and her face lighted up with a tender smile.

“Leave your husband and make our life one.”

“It is one as it is,” she answered, scarcely audibly.

“Yes, but altogether; altogether.”

“But how, Alexey, tell me how?” she said in melancholy mockery at the
hopelessness of her own position. “Is there any way out of such a
position? Am I not the wife of my husband?”

“There is a way out of every position. We must take our line,” he said.
“Anything’s better than the position in which you’re living. Of course,
I see how you torture yourself over everything—the world and your son
and your husband.”

“Oh, not over my husband,” she said, with a quiet smile. “I don’t know
him, I don’t think of him. He doesn’t exist.”

“You’re not speaking sincerely. I know you. You worry about him too.”

“Oh, he doesn’t even know,” she said, and suddenly a hot flush came
over her face; her cheeks, her brow, her neck crimsoned, and tears of
shame came into her eyes. “But we won’t talk of him.”


Chapter 23

Vronsky had several times already, though not so resolutely as now,
tried to bring her to consider their position, and every time he had
been confronted by the same superficiality and triviality with which
she met his appeal now. It was as though there were something in this
which she could not or would not face, as though directly she began to
speak of this, she, the real Anna, retreated somehow into herself, and
another strange and unaccountable woman came out, whom he did not love,
and whom he feared, and who was in opposition to him. But today he was
resolved to have it out.

“Whether he knows or not,” said Vronsky, in his usual quiet and
resolute tone, “that’s nothing to do with us. We cannot ... you cannot
stay like this, especially now.”

“What’s to be done, according to you?” she asked with the same
frivolous irony. She who had so feared he would take her condition too
lightly was now vexed with him for deducing from it the necessity of
taking some step.

“Tell him everything, and leave him.”

“Very well, let us suppose I do that,” she said. “Do you know what the
result of that would be? I can tell you it all beforehand,” and a
wicked light gleamed in her eyes, that had been so soft a minute
before. “‘Eh, you love another man, and have entered into criminal
intrigues with him?’” (Mimicking her husband, she threw an emphasis on
the word “criminal,” as Alexey Alexandrovitch did.) “‘I warned you of
the results in the religious, the civil, and the domestic relation. You
have not listened to me. Now I cannot let you disgrace my name,—’” “and
my son,” she had meant to say, but about her son she could not
jest,—“‘disgrace my name, and’—and more in the same style,” she added.
“In general terms, he’ll say in his official manner, and with all
distinctness and precision, that he cannot let me go, but will take all
measures in his power to prevent scandal. And he will calmly and
punctually act in accordance with his words. That’s what will happen.
He’s not a man, but a machine, and a spiteful machine when he’s angry,”
she added, recalling Alexey Alexandrovitch as she spoke, with all the
peculiarities of his figure and manner of speaking, and reckoning
against him every defect she could find in him, softening nothing for
the great wrong she herself was doing him.

“But, Anna,” said Vronsky, in a soft and persuasive voice, trying to
soothe her, “we absolutely must, anyway, tell him, and then be guided
by the line he takes.”

“What, run away?”

“And why not run away? I don’t see how we can keep on like this. And
not for my sake—I see that you suffer.”

“Yes, run away, and become your mistress,” she said angrily.

“Anna,” he said, with reproachful tenderness.

“Yes,” she went on, “become your mistress, and complete the ruin
of....”

Again she would have said “my son,” but she could not utter that word.

Vronsky could not understand how she, with her strong and truthful
nature, could endure this state of deceit, and not long to get out of
it. But he did not suspect that the chief cause of it was the
word—_son_, which she could not bring herself to pronounce. When she
thought of her son, and his future attitude to his mother, who had
abandoned his father, she felt such terror at what she had done, that
she could not face it; but, like a woman, could only try to comfort
herself with lying assurances that everything would remain as it always
had been, and that it was possible to forget the fearful question of
how it would be with her son.

“I beg you, I entreat you,” she said suddenly, taking his hand, and
speaking in quite a different tone, sincere and tender, “never speak to
me of that!”

“But, Anna....”

“Never. Leave it to me. I know all the baseness, all the horror of my
position; but it’s not so easy to arrange as you think. And leave it to
me, and do what I say. Never speak to me of it. Do you promise me?...
No, no, promise!...”

“I promise everything, but I can’t be at peace, especially after what
you have told me. I can’t be at peace, when you can’t be at peace....”

“I?” she repeated. “Yes, I am worried sometimes; but that will pass, if
you will never talk about this. When you talk about it—it’s only then
it worries me.”

“I don’t understand,” he said.

“I know,” she interrupted him, “how hard it is for your truthful nature
to lie, and I grieve for you. I often think that you have ruined your
whole life for me.”

“I was just thinking the very same thing,” he said; “how could you
sacrifice everything for my sake? I can’t forgive myself that you’re
unhappy!”

“I unhappy?” she said, coming closer to him, and looking at him with an
ecstatic smile of love. “I am like a hungry man who has been given
food. He may be cold, and dressed in rags, and ashamed, but he is not
unhappy. I unhappy? No, this is my unhappiness....”

She could hear the sound of her son’s voice coming towards them, and
glancing swiftly round the terrace, she got up impulsively. Her eyes
glowed with the fire he knew so well; with a rapid movement she raised
her lovely hands, covered with rings, took his head, looked a long look
into his face, and, putting up her face with smiling, parted lips,
swiftly kissed his mouth and both eyes, and pushed him away. She would
have gone, but he held her back.

“When?” he murmured in a whisper, gazing in ecstasy at her.

“Tonight, at one o’clock,” she whispered, and, with a heavy sigh, she
walked with her light, swift step to meet her son.

Seryozha had been caught by the rain in the big garden, and he and his
nurse had taken shelter in an arbor.

“Well, _au revoir_,” she said to Vronsky. “I must soon be getting ready
for the races. Betsy promised to fetch me.”

Vronsky, looking at his watch, went away hurriedly.


Chapter 24

When Vronsky looked at his watch on the Karenins’ balcony, he was so
greatly agitated and lost in his thoughts that he saw the figures on
the watch’s face, but could not take in what time it was. He came out
on to the highroad and walked, picking his way carefully through the
mud, to his carriage. He was so completely absorbed in his feeling for
Anna, that he did not even think what o’clock it was, and whether he
had time to go to Bryansky’s. He had left him, as often happens, only
the external faculty of memory, that points out each step one has to
take, one after the other. He went up to his coachman, who was dozing
on the box in the shadow, already lengthening, of a thick limetree; he
admired the shifting clouds of midges circling over the hot horses,
and, waking the coachman, he jumped into the carriage, and told him to
drive to Bryansky’s. It was only after driving nearly five miles that
he had sufficiently recovered himself to look at his watch, and realize
that it was half-past five, and he was late.

There were several races fixed for that day: the Mounted Guards’ race,
then the officers’ mile-and-a-half race, then the three-mile race, and
then the race for which he was entered. He could still be in time for
his race, but if he went to Bryansky’s he could only just be in time,
and he would arrive when the whole of the court would be in their
places. That would be a pity. But he had promised Bryansky to come, and
so he decided to drive on, telling the coachman not to spare the
horses.

He reached Bryansky’s, spent five minutes there, and galloped back.
This rapid drive calmed him. All that was painful in his relations with
Anna, all the feeling of indefiniteness left by their conversation, had
slipped out of his mind. He was thinking now with pleasure and
excitement of the race, of his being anyhow, in time, and now and then
the thought of the blissful interview awaiting him that night flashed
across his imagination like a flaming light.

The excitement of the approaching race gained upon him as he drove
further and further into the atmosphere of the races, overtaking
carriages driving up from the summer villas or out of Petersburg.

At his quarters no one was left at home; all were at the races, and his
valet was looking out for him at the gate. While he was changing his
clothes, his valet told him that the second race had begun already,
that a lot of gentlemen had been to ask for him, and a boy had twice
run up from the stables. Dressing without hurry (he never hurried
himself, and never lost his self-possession), Vronsky drove to the
sheds. From the sheds he could see a perfect sea of carriages, and
people on foot, soldiers surrounding the race course, and pavilions
swarming with people. The second race was apparently going on, for just
as he went into the sheds he heard a bell ringing. Going towards the
stable, he met the white-legged chestnut, Mahotin’s Gladiator, being
led to the race-course in a blue forage horsecloth, with what looked
like huge ears edged with blue.

“Where’s Cord?” he asked the stable-boy.

“In the stable, putting on the saddle.”

In the open horse-box stood Frou-Frou, saddled ready. They were just
going to lead her out.

“I’m not too late?”

“All right! All right!” said the Englishman; “don’t upset yourself!”

Vronsky once more took in in one glance the exquisite lines of his
favorite mare; who was quivering all over, and with an effort he tore
himself from the sight of her, and went out of the stable. He went
towards the pavilions at the most favorable moment for escaping
attention. The mile-and-a-half race was just finishing, and all eyes
were fixed on the horse-guard in front and the light hussar behind,
urging their horses on with a last effort close to the winning post.
From the center and outside of the ring all were crowding to the
winning post, and a group of soldiers and officers of the horse-guards
were shouting loudly their delight at the expected triumph of their
officer and comrade. Vronsky moved into the middle of the crowd
unnoticed, almost at the very moment when the bell rang at the finish
of the race, and the tall, mudspattered horse-guard who came in first,
bending over the saddle, let go the reins of his panting gray horse
that looked dark with sweat.

The horse, stiffening out its legs, with an effort stopped its rapid
course, and the officer of the horse-guards looked round him like a man
waking up from a heavy sleep, and just managed to smile. A crowd of
friends and outsiders pressed round him.

Vronsky intentionally avoided that select crowd of the upper world,
which was moving and talking with discreet freedom before the
pavilions. He knew that Madame Karenina was there, and Betsy, and his
brother’s wife, and he purposely did not go near them for fear of
something distracting his attention. But he was continually met and
stopped by acquaintances, who told him about the previous races, and
kept asking him why he was so late.

At the time when the racers had to go to the pavilion to receive the
prizes, and all attention was directed to that point, Vronsky’s elder
brother, Alexander, a colonel with heavy fringed epaulets, came up to
him. He was not tall, though as broadly built as Alexey, and handsomer
and rosier than he; he had a red nose, and an open, drunken-looking
face.

“Did you get my note?” he said. “There’s never any finding you.”

Alexander Vronsky, in spite of the dissolute life, and in especial the
drunken habits, for which he was notorious, was quite one of the court
circle.

Now, as he talked to his brother of a matter bound to be exceedingly
disagreeable to him, knowing that the eyes of many people might be
fixed upon him, he kept a smiling countenance, as though he were
jesting with his brother about something of little moment.

“I got it, and I really can’t make out what _you_ are worrying yourself
about,” said Alexey.

“I’m worrying myself because the remark has just been made to me that
you weren’t here, and that you were seen in Peterhof on Monday.”

“There are matters which only concern those directly interested in
them, and the matter you are so worried about is....”

“Yes, but if so, you may as well cut the service....”

“I beg you not to meddle, and that’s all I have to say.”

Alexey Vronsky’s frowning face turned white, and his prominent lower
jaw quivered, which happened rarely with him. Being a man of very warm
heart, he was seldom angry; but when he was angry, and when his chin
quivered, then, as Alexander Vronsky knew, he was dangerous. Alexander
Vronsky smiled gaily.

“I only wanted to give you Mother’s letter. Answer it, and don’t worry
about anything just before the race. _Bonne chance,_” he added, smiling
and he moved away from him. But after him another friendly greeting
brought Vronsky to a standstill.

“So you won’t recognize your friends! How are you, _mon cher?_” said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, as conspicuously brilliant in the midst of all the
Petersburg brilliance as he was in Moscow, his face rosy, and his
whiskers sleek and glossy. “I came up yesterday, and I’m delighted that
I shall see your triumph. When shall we meet?”

“Come tomorrow to the messroom,” said Vronsky, and squeezing him by the
sleeve of his coat, with apologies, he moved away to the center of the
race course, where the horses were being led for the great
steeplechase.

The horses who had run in the last race were being led home, steaming
and exhausted, by the stable-boys, and one after another the fresh
horses for the coming race made their appearance, for the most part
English racers, wearing horsecloths, and looking with their drawn-up
bellies like strange, huge birds. On the right was led in Frou-Frou,
lean and beautiful, lifting up her elastic, rather long pasterns, as
though moved by springs. Not far from her they were taking the rug off
the lop-eared Gladiator. The strong, exquisite, perfectly correct lines
of the stallion, with his superb hind-quarters and excessively short
pasterns almost over his hoofs, attracted Vronsky’s attention in spite
of himself. He would have gone up to his mare, but he was again
detained by an acquaintance.

“Oh, there’s Karenin!” said the acquaintance with whom he was chatting.
“He’s looking for his wife, and she’s in the middle of the pavilion.
Didn’t you see her?”

“No,” answered Vronsky, and without even glancing round towards the
pavilion where his friend was pointing out Madame Karenina, he went up
to his mare.

Vronsky had not had time to look at the saddle, about which he had to
give some direction, when the competitors were summoned to the pavilion
to receive their numbers and places in the row at starting. Seventeen
officers, looking serious and severe, many with pale faces, met
together in the pavilion and drew the numbers. Vronsky drew the number
seven. The cry was heard: “Mount!”

Feeling that with the others riding in the race, he was the center upon
which all eyes were fastened, Vronsky walked up to his mare in that
state of nervous tension in which he usually became deliberate and
composed in his movements. Cord, in honor of the races, had put on his
best clothes, a black coat buttoned up, a stiffly starched collar,
which propped up his cheeks, a round black hat, and top boots. He was
calm and dignified as ever, and was with his own hands holding
Frou-Frou by both reins, standing straight in front of her. Frou-Frou
was still trembling as though in a fever. Her eye, full of fire,
glanced sideways at Vronsky. Vronsky slipped his finger under the
saddle-girth. The mare glanced aslant at him, drew up her lip, and
twitched her ear. The Englishman puckered up his lips, intending to
indicate a smile that anyone should verify his saddling.

“Get up; you won’t feel so excited.”

Vronsky looked round for the last time at his rivals. He knew that he
would not see them during the race. Two were already riding forward to
the point from which they were to start. Galtsin, a friend of Vronsky’s
and one of his more formidable rivals, was moving round a bay horse
that would not let him mount. A little light hussar in tight riding
breeches rode off at a gallop, crouched up like a cat on the saddle, in
imitation of English jockeys. Prince Kuzovlev sat with a white face on
his thoroughbred mare from the Grabovsky stud, while an English groom
led her by the bridle. Vronsky and all his comrades knew Kuzovlev and
his peculiarity of “weak nerves” and terrible vanity. They knew that he
was afraid of everything, afraid of riding a spirited horse. But now,
just because it was terrible, because people broke their necks, and
there was a doctor standing at each obstacle, and an ambulance with a
cross on it, and a sister of mercy, he had made up his mind to take
part in the race. Their eyes met, and Vronsky gave him a friendly and
encouraging nod. Only one he did not see, his chief rival, Mahotin on
Gladiator.

“Don’t be in a hurry,” said Cord to Vronsky, “and remember one thing:
don’t hold her in at the fences, and don’t urge her on; let her go as
she likes.”

“All right, all right,” said Vronsky, taking the reins.

“If you can, lead the race; but don’t lose heart till the last minute,
even if you’re behind.”

Before the mare had time to move, Vronsky stepped with an agile,
vigorous movement into the steel-toothed stirrup, and lightly and
firmly seated himself on the creaking leather of the saddle. Getting
his right foot in the stirrup, he smoothed the double reins, as he
always did, between his fingers, and Cord let go.

As though she did not know which foot to put first, Frou-Frou started,
dragging at the reins with her long neck, and as though she were on
springs, shaking her rider from side to side. Cord quickened his step,
following him. The excited mare, trying to shake off her rider first on
one side and then the other, pulled at the reins, and Vronsky tried in
vain with voice and hand to soothe her.

They were just reaching the dammed-up stream on their way to the
starting point. Several of the riders were in front and several behind,
when suddenly Vronsky heard the sound of a horse galloping in the mud
behind him, and he was overtaken by Mahotin on his white-legged,
lop-eared Gladiator. Mahotin smiled, showing his long teeth, but
Vronsky looked angrily at him. He did not like him, and regarded him
now as his most formidable rival. He was angry with him for galloping
past and exciting his mare. Frou-Frou started into a gallop, her left
foot forward, made two bounds, and fretting at the tightened reins,
passed into a jolting trot, bumping her rider up and down. Cord, too,
scowled, and followed Vronsky almost at a trot.


Chapter 25

There were seventeen officers in all riding in this race. The race
course was a large three-mile ring of the form of an ellipse in front
of the pavilion. On this course nine obstacles had been arranged: the
stream, a big and solid barrier five feet high, just before the
pavilion, a dry ditch, a ditch full of water, a precipitous slope, an
Irish barricade (one of the most difficult obstacles, consisting of a
mound fenced with brushwood, beyond which was a ditch out of sight for
the horses, so that the horse had to clear both obstacles or might be
killed); then two more ditches filled with water, and one dry one; and
the end of the race was just facing the pavilion. But the race began
not in the ring, but two hundred yards away from it, and in that part
of the course was the first obstacle, a dammed-up stream, seven feet in
breadth, which the racers could leap or wade through as they preferred.

Three times they were ranged ready to start, but each time some horse
thrust itself out of line, and they had to begin again. The umpire who
was starting them, Colonel Sestrin, was beginning to lose his temper,
when at last for the fourth time he shouted “Away!” and the racers
started.

Every eye, every opera-glass, was turned on the brightly colored group
of riders at the moment they were in line to start.

“They’re off! They’re starting!” was heard on all sides after the hush
of expectation.

And little groups and solitary figures among the public began running
from place to place to get a better view. In the very first minute the
close group of horsemen drew out, and it could be seen that they were
approaching the stream in twos and threes and one behind another. To
the spectators it seemed as though they had all started simultaneously,
but to the racers there were seconds of difference that had great value
to them.

Frou-Frou, excited and over-nervous, had lost the first moment, and
several horses had started before her, but before reaching the stream,
Vronsky, who was holding in the mare with all his force as she tugged
at the bridle, easily overtook three, and there were left in front of
him Mahotin’s chestnut Gladiator, whose hind-quarters were moving
lightly and rhythmically up and down exactly in front of Vronsky, and
in front of all, the dainty mare Diana bearing Kuzovlev more dead than
alive.

For the first instant Vronsky was not master either of himself or his
mare. Up to the first obstacle, the stream, he could not guide the
motions of his mare.

Gladiator and Diana came up to it together and almost at the same
instant; simultaneously they rose above the stream and flew across to
the other side; Frou-Frou darted after them, as if flying; but at the
very moment when Vronsky felt himself in the air, he suddenly saw
almost under his mare’s hoofs Kuzovlev, who was floundering with Diana
on the further side of the stream. (Kuzovlev had let go the reins as he
took the leap, and the mare had sent him flying over her head.) Those
details Vronsky learned later; at the moment all he saw was that just
under him, where Frou-Frou must alight, Diana’s legs or head might be
in the way. But Frou-Frou drew up her legs and back in the very act of
leaping, like a falling cat, and, clearing the other mare, alighted
beyond her.

“O the darling!” thought Vronsky.

After crossing the stream Vronsky had complete control of his mare, and
began holding her in, intending to cross the great barrier behind
Mahotin, and to try to overtake him in the clear ground of about five
hundred yards that followed it.

The great barrier stood just in front of the imperial pavilion. The
Tsar and the whole court and crowds of people were all gazing at
them—at him, and Mahotin a length ahead of him, as they drew near the
“devil,” as the solid barrier was called. Vronsky was aware of those
eyes fastened upon him from all sides, but he saw nothing except the
ears and neck of his own mare, the ground racing to meet him, and the
back and white legs of Gladiator beating time swiftly before him, and
keeping always the same distance ahead. Gladiator rose, with no sound
of knocking against anything. With a wave of his short tail he
disappeared from Vronsky’s sight.

“Bravo!” cried a voice.

At the same instant, under Vronsky’s eyes, right before him flashed the
palings of the barrier. Without the slightest change in her action his
mare flew over it; the palings vanished, and he heard only a crash
behind him. The mare, excited by Gladiator’s keeping ahead, had risen
too soon before the barrier, and grazed it with her hind hoofs. But her
pace never changed, and Vronsky, feeling a spatter of mud in his face,
realized that he was once more the same distance from Gladiator. Once
more he perceived in front of him the same back and short tail, and
again the same swiftly moving white legs that got no further away.

At the very moment when Vronsky thought that now was the time to
overtake Mahotin, Frou-Frou herself, understanding his thoughts,
without any incitement on his part, gained ground considerably, and
began getting alongside of Mahotin on the most favorable side, close to
the inner cord. Mahotin would not let her pass that side. Vronsky had
hardly formed the thought that he could perhaps pass on the outer side,
when Frou-Frou shifted her pace and began overtaking him on the other
side. Frou-Frou’s shoulder, beginning by now to be dark with sweat, was
even with Gladiator’s back. For a few lengths they moved evenly. But
before the obstacle they were approaching, Vronsky began working at the
reins, anxious to avoid having to take the outer circle, and swiftly
passed Mahotin just upon the declivity. He caught a glimpse of his
mud-stained face as he flashed by. He even fancied that he smiled.
Vronsky passed Mahotin, but he was immediately aware of him close upon
him, and he never ceased hearing the even-thudding hoofs and the rapid
and still quite fresh breathing of Gladiator.

The next two obstacles, the water course and the barrier, were easily
crossed, but Vronsky began to hear the snorting and thud of Gladiator
closer upon him. He urged on his mare, and to his delight felt that she
easily quickened her pace, and the thud of Gladiator’s hoofs was again
heard at the same distance away.

Vronsky was at the head of the race, just as he wanted to be and as
Cord had advised, and now he felt sure of being the winner. His
excitement, his delight, and his tenderness for Frou-Frou grew keener
and keener. He longed to look round again, but he did not dare do this,
and tried to be cool and not to urge on his mare so to keep the same
reserve of force in her as he felt that Gladiator still kept. There
remained only one obstacle, the most difficult; if he could cross it
ahead of the others he would come in first. He was flying towards the
Irish barricade, Frou-Frou and he both together saw the barricade in
the distance, and both the man and the mare had a moment’s hesitation.
He saw the uncertainty in the mare’s ears and lifted the whip, but at
the same time felt that his fears were groundless; the mare knew what
was wanted. She quickened her pace and rose smoothly, just as he had
fancied she would, and as she left the ground gave herself up to the
force of her rush, which carried her far beyond the ditch; and with the
same rhythm, without effort, with the same leg forward, Frou-Frou fell
back into her pace again.

“Bravo, Vronsky!” he heard shouts from a knot of men—he knew they were
his friends in the regiment—who were standing at the obstacle. He could
not fail to recognize Yashvin’s voice though he did not see him.

“O my sweet!” he said inwardly to Frou-Frou, as he listened for what
was happening behind. “He’s cleared it!” he thought, catching the thud
of Gladiator’s hoofs behind him. There remained only the last ditch,
filled with water and five feet wide. Vronsky did not even look at it,
but anxious to get in a long way first began sawing away at the reins,
lifting the mare’s head and letting it go in time with her paces. He
felt that the mare was at her very last reserve of strength; not her
neck and shoulders merely were wet, but the sweat was standing in drops
on her mane, her head, her sharp ears, and her breath came in short,
sharp gasps. But he knew that she had strength left more than enough
for the remaining five hundred yards. It was only from feeling himself
nearer the ground and from the peculiar smoothness of his motion that
Vronsky knew how greatly the mare had quickened her pace. She flew over
the ditch as though not noticing it. She flew over it like a bird; but
at the same instant Vronsky, to his horror, felt that he had failed to
keep up with the mare’s pace, that he had, he did not know how, made a
fearful, unpardonable mistake, in recovering his seat in the saddle.
All at once his position had shifted and he knew that something awful
had happened. He could not yet make out what had happened, when the
white legs of a chestnut horse flashed by close to him, and Mahotin
passed at a swift gallop. Vronsky was touching the ground with one
foot, and his mare was sinking on that foot. He just had time to free
his leg when she fell on one side, gasping painfully, and, making vain
efforts to rise with her delicate, soaking neck, she fluttered on the
ground at his feet like a shot bird. The clumsy movement made by
Vronsky had broken her back. But that he only knew much later. At that
moment he knew only that Mahotin had flown swiftly by, while he stood
staggering alone on the muddy, motionless ground, and Frou-Frou lay
gasping before him, bending her head back and gazing at him with her
exquisite eyes. Still unable to realize what had happened, Vronsky
tugged at his mare’s reins. Again she struggled all over like a fish,
and her shoulders setting the saddle heaving, she rose on her front
legs but unable to lift her back, she quivered all over and again fell
on her side. With a face hideous with passion, his lower jaw trembling,
and his cheeks white, Vronsky kicked her with his heel in the stomach
and again fell to tugging at the rein. She did not stir, but thrusting
her nose into the ground, she simply gazed at her master with her
speaking eyes.

“A—a—a!” groaned Vronsky, clutching at his head. “Ah! what have I
done!” he cried. “The race lost! And my fault! shameful, unpardonable!
And the poor darling, ruined mare! Ah! what have I done!”

A crowd of men, a doctor and his assistant, the officers of his
regiment, ran up to him. To his misery he felt that he was whole and
unhurt. The mare had broken her back, and it was decided to shoot her.
Vronsky could not answer questions, could not speak to anyone. He
turned, and without picking up his cap that had fallen off, walked away
from the race course, not knowing where he was going. He felt utterly
wretched. For the first time in his life he knew the bitterest sort of
misfortune, misfortune beyond remedy, and caused by his own fault.

Yashvin overtook him with his cap, and led him home, and half an hour
later Vronsky had regained his self-possession. But the memory of that
race remained for long in his heart, the cruelest and bitterest memory
of his life.


Chapter 26

The external relations of Alexey Alexandrovitch and his wife had
remained unchanged. The sole difference lay in the fact that he was
more busily occupied than ever. As in former years, at the beginning of
the spring he had gone to a foreign watering-place for the sake of his
health, deranged by the winter’s work that every year grew heavier. And
just as always he returned in July and at once fell to work as usual
with increased energy. As usual, too, his wife had moved for the summer
to a villa out of town, while he remained in Petersburg. From the date
of their conversation after the party at Princess Tverskaya’s he had
never spoken again to Anna of his suspicions and his jealousies, and
that habitual tone of his bantering mimicry was the most convenient
tone possible for his present attitude to his wife. He was a little
colder to his wife. He simply seemed to be slightly displeased with her
for that first midnight conversation, which she had repelled. In his
attitude to her there was a shade of vexation, but nothing more. “You
would not be open with me,” he seemed to say, mentally addressing her;
“so much the worse for you. Now you may beg as you please, but I won’t
be open with you. So much the worse for you!” he said mentally, like a
man who, after vainly attempting to extinguish a fire, should fly in a
rage with his vain efforts and say, “Oh, very well then! you shall burn
for this!” This man, so subtle and astute in official life, did not
realize all the senselessness of such an attitude to his wife. He did
not realize it, because it was too terrible to him to realize his
actual position, and he shut down and locked and sealed up in his heart
that secret place where lay hid his feelings towards his family, that
is, his wife and son. He who had been such a careful father, had from
the end of that winter become peculiarly frigid to his son, and adopted
to him just the same bantering tone he used with his wife. “Aha, young
man!” was the greeting with which he met him.

Alexey Alexandrovitch asserted and believed that he had never in any
previous year had so much official business as that year. But he was
not aware that he sought work for himself that year, that this was one
of the means for keeping shut that secret place where lay hid his
feelings towards his wife and son and his thoughts about them, which
became more terrible the longer they lay there. If anyone had had the
right to ask Alexey Alexandrovitch what he thought of his wife’s
behavior, the mild and peaceable Alexey Alexandrovitch would have made
no answer, but he would have been greatly angered with any man who
should question him on that subject. For this reason there positively
came into Alexey Alexandrovitch’s face a look of haughtiness and
severity whenever anyone inquired after his wife’s health. Alexey
Alexandrovitch did not want to think at all about his wife’s behavior,
and he actually succeeded in not thinking about it at all.

Alexey Alexandrovitch’s permanent summer villa was in Peterhof, and the
Countess Lidia Ivanovna used as a rule to spend the summer there, close
to Anna, and constantly seeing her. That year Countess Lidia Ivanovna
declined to settle in Peterhof, was not once at Anna Arkadyevna’s, and
in conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch hinted at the unsuitability
of Anna’s close intimacy with Betsy and Vronsky. Alexey Alexandrovitch
sternly cut her short, roundly declaring his wife to be above
suspicion, and from that time began to avoid Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
He did not want to see, and did not see, that many people in society
cast dubious glances on his wife; he did not want to understand, and
did not understand, why his wife had so particularly insisted on
staying at Tsarskoe, where Betsy was staying, and not far from the camp
of Vronsky’s regiment. He did not allow himself to think about it, and
he did not think about it; but all the same though he never admitted it
to himself, and had no proofs, not even suspicious evidence, in the
bottom of his heart he knew beyond all doubt that he was a deceived
husband, and he was profoundly miserable about it.

How often during those eight years of happy life with his wife Alexey
Alexandrovitch had looked at other men’s faithless wives and other
deceived husbands and asked himself: “How can people descend to that?
how is it they don’t put an end to such a hideous position?” But now,
when the misfortune had come upon himself, he was so far from thinking
of putting an end to the position that he would not recognize it at
all, would not recognize it just because it was too awful, too
unnatural.

Since his return from abroad Alexey Alexandrovitch had twice been at
their country villa. Once he dined there, another time he spent the
evening there with a party of friends, but he had not once stayed the
night there, as it had been his habit to do in previous years.

The day of the races had been a very busy day for Alexey
Alexandrovitch; but when mentally sketching out the day in the morning,
he made up his mind to go to their country house to see his wife
immediately after dinner, and from there to the races, which all the
Court were to witness, and at which he was bound to be present. He was
going to see his wife, because he had determined to see her once a week
to keep up appearances. And besides, on that day, as it was the
fifteenth, he had to give his wife some money for her expenses,
according to their usual arrangement.

With his habitual control over his thoughts, though he thought all this
about his wife, he did not let his thoughts stray further in regard to
her.

That morning was a very full one for Alexey Alexandrovitch. The evening
before, Countess Lidia Ivanovna had sent him a pamphlet by a celebrated
traveler in China, who was staying in Petersburg, and with it she
enclosed a note begging him to see the traveler himself, as he was an
extremely interesting person from various points of view, and likely to
be useful. Alexey Alexandrovitch had not had time to read the pamphlet
through in the evening, and finished it in the morning. Then people
began arriving with petitions, and there came the reports, interviews,
appointments, dismissals, apportionment of rewards, pensions, grants,
notes, the workaday round, as Alexey Alexandrovitch called it, that
always took up so much time. Then there was private business of his
own, a visit from the doctor and the steward who managed his property.
The steward did not take up much time. He simply gave Alexey
Alexandrovitch the money he needed together with a brief statement of
the position of his affairs, which was not altogether satisfactory, as
it had happened that during that year, owing to increased expenses,
more had been paid out than usual, and there was a deficit. But the
doctor, a celebrated Petersburg doctor, who was an intimate
acquaintance of Alexey Alexandrovitch, took up a great deal of time.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had not expected him that day, and was surprised
at his visit, and still more so when the doctor questioned him very
carefully about his health, listened to his breathing, and tapped at
his liver. Alexey Alexandrovitch did not know that his friend Lidia
Ivanovna, noticing that he was not as well as usual that year, had
begged the doctor to go and examine him. “Do this for my sake,” the
Countess Lidia Ivanovna had said to him.

“I will do it for the sake of Russia, countess,” replied the doctor.

“A priceless man!” said the Countess Lidia Ivanovna.

The doctor was extremely dissatisfied with Alexey Alexandrovitch. He
found the liver considerably enlarged, and the digestive powers
weakened, while the course of mineral waters had been quite without
effect. He prescribed more physical exercise as far as possible, and as
far as possible less mental strain, and above all no worry—in other
words, just what was as much out of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s power as
abstaining from breathing. Then he withdrew, leaving in Alexey
Alexandrovitch an unpleasant sense that something was wrong with him,
and that there was no chance of curing it.

As he was coming away, the doctor chanced to meet on the staircase an
acquaintance of his, Sludin, who was secretary of Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s department. They had been comrades at the university,
and though they rarely met, they thought highly of each other and were
excellent friends, and so there was no one to whom the doctor would
have given his opinion of a patient so freely as to Sludin.

“How glad I am you’ve been seeing him!” said Sludin. “He’s not well,
and I fancy.... Well, what do you think of him?”

“I’ll tell you,” said the doctor, beckoning over Sludin’s head to his
coachman to bring the carriage round. “It’s just this,” said the
doctor, taking a finger of his kid glove in his white hands and pulling
it, “if you don’t strain the strings, and then try to break them,
you’ll find it a difficult job; but strain a string to its very utmost,
and the mere weight of one finger on the strained string will snap it.
And with his close assiduity, his conscientious devotion to his work,
he’s strained to the utmost; and there’s some outside burden weighing
on him, and not a light one,” concluded the doctor, raising his
eyebrows significantly. “Will you be at the races?” he added, as he
sank into his seat in the carriage.

“Yes, yes, to be sure; it does waste a lot of time,” the doctor
responded vaguely to some reply of Sludin’s he had not caught.

Directly after the doctor, who had taken up so much time, came the
celebrated traveler, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, by means of the
pamphlet he had only just finished reading and his previous
acquaintance with the subject, impressed the traveler by the depth of
his knowledge of the subject and the breadth and enlightenment of his
view of it.

At the same time as the traveler there was announced a provincial
marshal of nobility on a visit to Petersburg, with whom Alexey
Alexandrovitch had to have some conversation. After his departure, he
had to finish the daily routine of business with his secretary, and
then he still had to drive round to call on a certain great personage
on a matter of grave and serious import. Alexey Alexandrovitch only
just managed to be back by five o’clock, his dinner-hour, and after
dining with his secretary, he invited him to drive with him to his
country villa and to the races.

Though he did not acknowledge it to himself, Alexey Alexandrovitch
always tried nowadays to secure the presence of a third person in his
interviews with his wife.


Chapter 27

Anna was upstairs, standing before the looking-glass, and, with
Annushka’s assistance, pinning the last ribbon on her gown when she
heard carriage wheels crunching the gravel at the entrance.

“It’s too early for Betsy,” she thought, and glancing out of the window
she caught sight of the carriage and the black hat of Alexey
Alexandrovitch, and the ears that she knew so well sticking up each
side of it. “How unlucky! Can he be going to stay the night?” she
wondered, and the thought of all that might come of such a chance
struck her as so awful and terrible that, without dwelling on it for a
moment, she went down to meet him with a bright and radiant face; and
conscious of the presence of that spirit of falsehood and deceit in
herself that she had come to know of late, she abandoned herself to
that spirit and began talking, hardly knowing what she was saying.

“Ah, how nice of you!” she said, giving her husband her hand, and
greeting Sludin, who was like one of the family, with a smile. “You’re
staying the night, I hope?” was the first word the spirit of falsehood
prompted her to utter; “and now we’ll go together. Only it’s a pity
I’ve promised Betsy. She’s coming for me.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch knit his brows at Betsy’s name.

“Oh, I’m not going to separate the inseparables,” he said in his usual
bantering tone. “I’m going with Mihail Vassilievitch. I’m ordered
exercise by the doctors too. I’ll walk, and fancy myself at the springs
again.”

“There’s no hurry,” said Anna. “Would you like tea?”

She rang.

“Bring in tea, and tell Seryozha that Alexey Alexandrovitch is here.
Well, tell me, how have you been? Mihail Vassilievitch, you’ve not been
to see me before. Look how lovely it is out on the terrace,” she said,
turning first to one and then to the other.

She spoke very simply and naturally, but too much and too fast. She was
the more aware of this from noticing in the inquisitive look Mihail
Vassilievitch turned on her that he was, as it were, keeping watch on
her.

Mihail Vassilievitch promptly went out on the terrace.

She sat down beside her husband.

“You don’t look quite well,” she said.

“Yes,” he said; “the doctor’s been with me today and wasted an hour of
my time. I feel that someone of our friends must have sent him: my
health’s so precious, it seems.”

“No; what did he say?”

She questioned him about his health and what he had been doing, and
tried to persuade him to take a rest and come out to her.

All this she said brightly, rapidly, and with a peculiar brilliance in
her eyes. But Alexey Alexandrovitch did not now attach any special
significance to this tone of hers. He heard only her words and gave
them only the direct sense they bore. And he answered simply, though
jestingly. There was nothing remarkable in all this conversation, but
never after could Anna recall this brief scene without an agonizing
pang of shame.

Seryozha came in preceded by his governess. If Alexey Alexandrovitch
had allowed himself to observe he would have noticed the timid and
bewildered eyes with which Seryozha glanced first at his father and
then at his mother. But he would not see anything, and he did not see
it.

“Ah, the young man! He’s grown. Really, he’s getting quite a man. How
are you, young man?”

And he gave his hand to the scared child. Seryozha had been shy of his
father before, and now, ever since Alexey Alexandrovitch had taken to
calling him young man, and since that insoluble question had occurred
to him whether Vronsky were a friend or a foe, he avoided his father.
He looked round towards his mother as though seeking shelter. It was
only with his mother that he was at ease. Meanwhile, Alexey
Alexandrovitch was holding his son by the shoulder while he was
speaking to the governess, and Seryozha was so miserably uncomfortable
that Anna saw he was on the point of tears.

Anna, who had flushed a little the instant her son came in, noticing
that Seryozha was uncomfortable, got up hurriedly, took Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s hand from her son’s shoulder, and kissing the boy, led
him out onto the terrace, and quickly came back.

“It’s time to start, though,” said she, glancing at her watch. “How is
it Betsy doesn’t come?...”

“Yes,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, and getting up, he folded his hands
and cracked his fingers. “I’ve come to bring you some money, too, for
nightingales, we know, can’t live on fairy tales,” he said. “You want
it, I expect?”

“No, I don’t ... yes, I do,” she said, not looking at him, and
crimsoning to the roots of her hair. “But you’ll come back here after
the races, I suppose?”

“Oh, yes!” answered Alexey Alexandrovitch. “And here’s the glory of
Peterhof, Princess Tverskaya,” he added, looking out of the window at
the elegant English carriage with the tiny seats placed extremely high.
“What elegance! Charming! Well, let us be starting too, then.”

Princess Tverskaya did not get out of her carriage, but her groom, in
high boots, a cape, and black hat, darted out at the entrance.

“I’m going; good-bye!” said Anna, and kissing her son, she went up to
Alexey Alexandrovitch and held out her hand to him. “It was ever so
nice of you to come.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch kissed her hand.

“Well, _au revoir_, then! You’ll come back for some tea; that’s
delightful!” she said, and went out, gay and radiant. But as soon as
she no longer saw him, she was aware of the spot on her hand that his
lips had touched, and she shuddered with repulsion.


Chapter 28

When Alexey Alexandrovitch reached the race-course, Anna was already
sitting in the pavilion beside Betsy, in that pavilion where all the
highest society had gathered. She caught sight of her husband in the
distance. Two men, her husband and her lover, were the two centers of
her existence, and unaided by her external senses she was aware of
their nearness. She was aware of her husband approaching a long way
off, and she could not help following him in the surging crowd in the
midst of which he was moving. She watched his progress towards the
pavilion, saw him now responding condescendingly to an ingratiating
bow, now exchanging friendly, nonchalant greetings with his equals, now
assiduously trying to catch the eye of some great one of this world,
and taking off his big round hat that squeezed the tips of his ears.
All these ways of his she knew, and all were hateful to her. “Nothing
but ambition, nothing but the desire to get on, that’s all there is in
his soul,” she thought; “as for these lofty ideals, love of culture,
religion, they are only so many tools for getting on.”

From his glances towards the ladies’ pavilion (he was staring straight
at her, but did not distinguish his wife in the sea of muslin, ribbons,
feathers, parasols and flowers) she saw that he was looking for her,
but she purposely avoided noticing him.

“Alexey Alexandrovitch!” Princess Betsy called to him; “I’m sure you
don’t see your wife: here she is.”

He smiled his chilly smile.

“There’s so much splendor here that one’s eyes are dazzled,” he said,
and he went into the pavilion. He smiled to his wife as a man should
smile on meeting his wife after only just parting from her, and greeted
the princess and other acquaintances, giving to each what was due—that
is to say, jesting with the ladies and dealing out friendly greetings
among the men. Below, near the pavilion, was standing an
adjutant-general of whom Alexey Alexandrovitch had a high opinion,
noted for his intelligence and culture. Alexey Alexandrovitch entered
into conversation with him.

There was an interval between the races, and so nothing hindered
conversation. The adjutant-general expressed his disapproval of races.
Alexey Alexandrovitch replied defending them. Anna heard his high,
measured tones, not losing one word, and every word struck her as
false, and stabbed her ears with pain.

When the three-mile steeplechase was beginning, she bent forward and
gazed with fixed eyes at Vronsky as he went up to his horse and
mounted, and at the same time she heard that loathsome, never-ceasing
voice of her husband. She was in an agony of terror for Vronsky, but a
still greater agony was the never-ceasing, as it seemed to her, stream
of her husband’s shrill voice with its familiar intonations.

“I’m a wicked woman, a lost woman,” she thought; “but I don’t like
lying, I can’t endure falsehood, while as for _him_ (her husband) it’s
the breath of his life—falsehood. He knows all about it, he sees it
all; what does he care if he can talk so calmly? If he were to kill me,
if he were to kill Vronsky, I might respect him. No, all he wants is
falsehood and propriety,” Anna said to herself, not considering exactly
what it was she wanted of her husband, and how she would have liked to
see him behave. She did not understand either that Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s peculiar loquacity that day, so exasperating to her,
was merely the expression of his inward distress and uneasiness. As a
child that has been hurt skips about, putting all his muscles into
movement to drown the pain, in the same way Alexey Alexandrovitch
needed mental exercise to drown the thoughts of his wife that in her
presence and in Vronsky’s, and with the continual iteration of his
name, would force themselves on his attention. And it was as natural
for him to talk well and cleverly, as it is natural for a child to skip
about. He was saying:

“Danger in the races of officers, of cavalry men, is an essential
element in the race. If England can point to the most brilliant feats
of cavalry in military history, it is simply owing to the fact that she
has historically developed this force both in beasts and in men. Sport
has, in my opinion, a great value, and as is always the case, we see
nothing but what is most superficial.”

“It’s not superficial,” said Princess Tverskaya. “One of the officers,
they say, has broken two ribs.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled his smile, which uncovered his teeth, but
revealed nothing more.

“We’ll admit, princess, that that’s not superficial,” he said, “but
internal. But that’s not the point,” and he turned again to the general
with whom he was talking seriously; “we mustn’t forget that those who
are taking part in the race are military men, who have chosen that
career, and one must allow that every calling has its disagreeable
side. It forms an integral part of the duties of an officer. Low
sports, such as prize-fighting or Spanish bull-fights, are a sign of
barbarity. But specialized trials of skill are a sign of development.”

“No, I shan’t come another time; it’s too upsetting,” said Princess
Betsy. “Isn’t it, Anna?”

“It is upsetting, but one can’t tear oneself away,” said another lady.
“If I’d been a Roman woman I should never have missed a single circus.”

Anna said nothing, and keeping her opera-glass up, gazed always at the
same spot.

At that moment a tall general walked through the pavilion. Breaking off
what he was saying, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up hurriedly, though with
dignity, and bowed low to the general.

“You’re not racing?” the officer asked, chaffing him.

“My race is a harder one,” Alexey Alexandrovitch responded
deferentially.

And though the answer meant nothing, the general looked as though he
had heard a witty remark from a witty man, and fully relished _la
pointe de la sauce_.

“There are two aspects,” Alexey Alexandrovitch resumed: “those who take
part and those who look on; and love for such spectacles is an
unmistakable proof of a low degree of development in the spectator, I
admit, but....”

“Princess, bets!” sounded Stepan Arkadyevitch’s voice from below,
addressing Betsy. “Who’s your favorite?”

“Anna and I are for Kuzovlev,” replied Betsy.

“I’m for Vronsky. A pair of gloves?”

“Done!”

“But it is a pretty sight, isn’t it?”

Alexey Alexandrovitch paused while there was talking about him, but he
began again directly.

“I admit that manly sports do not....” he was continuing.

But at that moment the racers started, and all conversation ceased.
Alexey Alexandrovitch too was silent, and everyone stood up and turned
towards the stream. Alexey Alexandrovitch took no interest in the race,
and so he did not watch the racers, but fell listlessly to scanning the
spectators with his weary eyes. His eyes rested upon Anna.

Her face was white and set. She was obviously seeing nothing and no one
but one man. Her hand had convulsively clutched her fan, and she held
her breath. He looked at her and hastily turned away, scrutinizing
other faces.

“But here’s this lady too, and others very much moved as well; it’s
very natural,” Alexey Alexandrovitch told himself. He tried not to look
at her, but unconsciously his eyes were drawn to her. He examined that
face again, trying not to read what was so plainly written on it, and
against his own will, with horror read on it what he did not want to
know.

The first fall—Kuzovlev’s, at the stream—agitated everyone, but Alexey
Alexandrovitch saw distinctly on Anna’s pale, triumphant face that the
man she was watching had not fallen. When, after Mahotin and Vronsky
had cleared the worst barrier, the next officer had been thrown
straight on his head at it and fatally injured, and a shudder of horror
passed over the whole public, Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that Anna did
not even notice it, and had some difficulty in realizing what they were
talking of about her. But more and more often, and with greater
persistence, he watched her. Anna, wholly engrossed as she was with the
race, became aware of her husband’s cold eyes fixed upon her from one
side.

She glanced round for an instant, looked inquiringly at him, and with a
slight frown turned away again.

“Ah, I don’t care!” she seemed to say to him, and she did not once
glance at him again.

The race was an unlucky one, and of the seventeen officers who rode in
it more than half were thrown and hurt. Towards the end of the race
everyone was in a state of agitation, which was intensified by the fact
that the Tsar was displeased.


Chapter 29

Everyone was loudly expressing disapprobation, everyone was repeating a
phrase someone had uttered—“The lions and gladiators will be the next
thing,” and everyone was feeling horrified; so that when Vronsky fell
to the ground, and Anna moaned aloud, there was nothing very out of the
way in it. But afterwards a change came over Anna’s face which really
was beyond decorum. She utterly lost her head. She began fluttering
like a caged bird, at one moment would have got up and moved away, at
the next turned to Betsy.

“Let us go, let us go!” she said.

But Betsy did not hear her. She was bending down, talking to a general
who had come up to her.

Alexey Alexandrovitch went up to Anna and courteously offered her his
arm.

“Let us go, if you like,” he said in French, but Anna was listening to
the general and did not notice her husband.

“He’s broken his leg too, so they say,” the general was saying. “This
is beyond everything.”

Without answering her husband, Anna lifted her opera-glass and gazed
towards the place where Vronsky had fallen; but it was so far off, and
there was such a crowd of people about it, that she could make out
nothing. She laid down the opera-glass, and would have moved away, but
at that moment an officer galloped up and made some announcement to the
Tsar. Anna craned forward, listening.

“Stiva! Stiva!” she cried to her brother.

But her brother did not hear her. Again she would have moved away.

“Once more I offer you my arm if you want to be going,” said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, reaching towards her hand.

She drew back from him with aversion, and without looking in his face
answered:

“No, no, let me be, I’ll stay.”

She saw now that from the place of Vronsky’s accident an officer was
running across the course towards the pavilion. Betsy waved her
handkerchief to him. The officer brought the news that the rider was
not killed, but the horse had broken its back.

On hearing this Anna sat down hurriedly, and hid her face in her fan.
Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that she was weeping, and could not control
her tears, nor even the sobs that were shaking her bosom. Alexey
Alexandrovitch stood so as to screen her, giving her time to recover
herself.

“For the third time I offer you my arm,” he said to her after a little
time, turning to her. Anna gazed at him and did not know what to say.
Princess Betsy came to her rescue.

“No, Alexey Alexandrovitch; I brought Anna and I promised to take her
home,” put in Betsy.

“Excuse me, princess,” he said, smiling courteously but looking her
very firmly in the face, “but I see that Anna’s not very well, and I
wish her to come home with me.”

Anna looked about her in a frightened way, got up submissively, and
laid her hand on her husband’s arm.

“I’ll send to him and find out, and let you know,” Betsy whispered to
her.

As they left the pavilion, Alexey Alexandrovitch, as always, talked to
those he met, and Anna had, as always, to talk and answer; but she was
utterly beside herself, and moved hanging on her husband’s arm as
though in a dream.

“Is he killed or not? Is it true? Will he come or not? Shall I see him
today?” she was thinking.

She took her seat in her husband’s carriage in silence, and in silence
drove out of the crowd of carriages. In spite of all he had seen,
Alexey Alexandrovitch still did not allow himself to consider his
wife’s real condition. He merely saw the outward symptoms. He saw that
she was behaving unbecomingly, and considered it his duty to tell her
so. But it was very difficult for him not to say more, to tell her
nothing but that. He opened his mouth to tell her she had behaved
unbecomingly, but he could not help saying something utterly different.

“What an inclination we all have, though, for these cruel spectacles,”
he said. “I observe....”

“Eh? I don’t understand,” said Anna contemptuously.

He was offended, and at once began to say what he had meant to say.

“I am obliged to tell you,” he began.

“So now we are to have it out,” she thought, and she felt frightened.

“I am obliged to tell you that your behavior has been unbecoming
today,” he said to her in French.

“In what way has my behavior been unbecoming?” she said aloud, turning
her head swiftly and looking him straight in the face, not with the
bright expression that seemed covering something, but with a look of
determination, under which she concealed with difficulty the dismay she
was feeling.

“Mind,” he said, pointing to the open window opposite the coachman.

He got up and pulled up the window.

“What did you consider unbecoming?” she repeated.

“The despair you were unable to conceal at the accident to one of the
riders.”

He waited for her to answer, but she was silent, looking straight
before her.

“I have already begged you so to conduct yourself in society that even
malicious tongues can find nothing to say against you. There was a time
when I spoke of your inward attitude, but I am not speaking of that
now. Now I speak only of your external attitude. You have behaved
improperly, and I would wish it not to occur again.”

She did not hear half of what he was saying; she felt panic-stricken
before him, and was thinking whether it was true that Vronsky was not
killed. Was it of him they were speaking when they said the rider was
unhurt, but the horse had broken its back? She merely smiled with a
pretense of irony when he finished, and made no reply, because she had
not heard what he said. Alexey Alexandrovitch had begun to speak
boldly, but as he realized plainly what he was speaking of, the dismay
she was feeling infected him too. He saw the smile, and a strange
misapprehension came over him.

“She is smiling at my suspicions. Yes, she will tell me directly what
she told me before; that there is no foundation for my suspicions, that
it’s absurd.”

At that moment, when the revelation of everything was hanging over him,
there was nothing he expected so much as that she would answer
mockingly as before that his suspicions were absurd and utterly
groundless. So terrible to him was what he knew that now he was ready
to believe anything. But the expression of her face, scared and gloomy,
did not now promise even deception.

“Possibly I was mistaken,” said he. “If so, I beg your pardon.”

“No, you were not mistaken,” she said deliberately, looking desperately
into his cold face. “You were not mistaken. I was, and I could not help
being in despair. I hear you, but I am thinking of him. I love him, I
am his mistress; I can’t bear you; I’m afraid of you, and I hate
you.... You can do what you like to me.”

And dropping back into the corner of the carriage, she broke into sobs,
hiding her face in her hands. Alexey Alexandrovitch did not stir, and
kept looking straight before him. But his whole face suddenly bore the
solemn rigidity of the dead, and his expression did not change during
the whole time of the drive home. On reaching the house he turned his
head to her, still with the same expression.

“Very well! But I expect a strict observance of the external forms of
propriety till such time”—his voice shook—“as I may take measures to
secure my honor and communicate them to you.”

He got out first and helped her to get out. Before the servants he
pressed her hand, took his seat in the carriage, and drove back to
Petersburg. Immediately afterwards a footman came from Princess Betsy
and brought Anna a note.

“I sent to Alexey to find out how he is, and he writes me he is quite
well and unhurt, but in despair.”

“So _he_ will be here,” she thought. “What a good thing I told him
all!”

She glanced at her watch. She had still three hours to wait, and the
memories of their last meeting set her blood in flame.

“My God, how light it is! It’s dreadful, but I do love to see his face,
and I do love this fantastic light.... My husband! Oh! yes.... Well,
thank God! everything’s over with him.”


Chapter 30

In the little German watering-place to which the Shtcherbatskys had
betaken themselves, as in all places indeed where people are gathered
together, the usual process, as it were, of the crystallization of
society went on, assigning to each member of that society a definite
and unalterable place. Just as the particle of water in frost,
definitely and unalterably, takes the special form of the crystal of
snow, so each new person that arrived at the springs was at once placed
in his special place.

_Fürst_ Shtcherbatsky, _sammt Gemahlin und Tochter_, by the apartments
they took, and from their name and from the friends they made, were
immediately crystallized into a definite place marked out for them.

There was visiting the watering-place that year a real German Fürstin,
in consequence of which the crystallizing process went on more
vigorously than ever. Princess Shtcherbatskaya wished, above
everything, to present her daughter to this German princess, and the
day after their arrival she duly performed this rite. Kitty made a low
and graceful curtsey in the _very simple_, that is to say, very elegant
frock that had been ordered her from Paris. The German princess said,
“I hope the roses will soon come back to this pretty little face,” and
for the Shtcherbatskys certain definite lines of existence were at once
laid down from which there was no departing. The Shtcherbatskys made
the acquaintance too of the family of an English Lady Somebody, and of
a German countess and her son, wounded in the last war, and of a
learned Swede, and of M. Canut and his sister. But yet inevitably the
Shtcherbatskys were thrown most into the society of a Moscow lady,
Marya Yevgenyevna Rtishtcheva and her daughter, whom Kitty disliked,
because she had fallen ill, like herself, over a love affair, and a
Moscow colonel, whom Kitty had known from childhood, and always seen in
uniform and epaulets, and who now, with his little eyes and his open
neck and flowered cravat, was uncommonly ridiculous and tedious,
because there was no getting rid of him. When all this was so firmly
established, Kitty began to be very much bored, especially as the
prince went away to Carlsbad and she was left alone with her mother.
She took no interest in the people she knew, feeling that nothing fresh
would come of them. Her chief mental interest in the watering-place
consisted in watching and making theories about the people she did not
know. It was characteristic of Kitty that she always imagined
everything in people in the most favorable light possible, especially
so in those she did not know. And now as she made surmises as to who
people were, what were their relations to one another, and what they
were like, Kitty endowed them with the most marvelous and noble
characters, and found confirmation of her idea in her observations.

Of these people the one that attracted her most was a Russian girl who
had come to the watering-place with an invalid Russian lady, Madame
Stahl, as everyone called her. Madame Stahl belonged to the highest
society, but she was so ill that she could not walk, and only on
exceptionally fine days made her appearance at the springs in an
invalid carriage. But it was not so much from ill-health as from
pride—so Princess Shtcherbatskaya interpreted it—that Madame Stahl had
not made the acquaintance of anyone among the Russians there. The
Russian girl looked after Madame Stahl, and besides that, she was, as
Kitty observed, on friendly terms with all the invalids who were
seriously ill, and there were many of them at the springs, and looked
after them in the most natural way. This Russian girl was not, as Kitty
gathered, related to Madame Stahl, nor was she a paid attendant. Madame
Stahl called her Varenka, and other people called her “Mademoiselle
Varenka.” Apart from the interest Kitty took in this girl’s relations
with Madame Stahl and with other unknown persons, Kitty, as often
happened, felt an inexplicable attraction to Mademoiselle Varenka, and
was aware when their eyes met that she too liked her.

Of Mademoiselle Varenka one would not say that she had passed her first
youth, but she was, as it were, a creature without youth; she might
have been taken for nineteen or for thirty. If her features were
criticized separately, she was handsome rather than plain, in spite of
the sickly hue of her face. She would have been a good figure, too, if
it had not been for her extreme thinness and the size of her head,
which was too large for her medium height. But she was not likely to be
attractive to men. She was like a fine flower, already past its bloom
and without fragrance, though the petals were still unwithered.
Moreover, she would have been unattractive to men also from the lack of
just what Kitty had too much of—of the suppressed fire of vitality, and
the consciousness of her own attractiveness.

She always seemed absorbed in work about which there could be no doubt,
and so it seemed she could not take interest in anything outside it. It
was just this contrast with her own position that was for Kitty the
great attraction of Mademoiselle Varenka. Kitty felt that in her, in
her manner of life, she would find an example of what she was now so
painfully seeking: interest in life, a dignity in life—apart from the
worldly relations of girls with men, which so revolted Kitty, and
appeared to her now as a shameful hawking about of goods in search of a
purchaser. The more attentively Kitty watched her unknown friend, the
more convinced she was this girl was the perfect creature she fancied
her, and the more eagerly she wished to make her acquaintance.

The two girls used to meet several times a day, and every time they
met, Kitty’s eyes said: “Who are you? What are you? Are you really the
exquisite creature I imagine you to be? But for goodness’ sake don’t
suppose,” her eyes added, “that I would force my acquaintance on you, I
simply admire you and like you.” “I like you too, and you’re very, very
sweet. And I should like you better still, if I had time,” answered the
eyes of the unknown girl. Kitty saw indeed, that she was always busy.
Either she was taking the children of a Russian family home from the
springs, or fetching a shawl for a sick lady, and wrapping her up in
it, or trying to interest an irritable invalid, or selecting and buying
cakes for tea for someone.

Soon after the arrival of the Shtcherbatskys there appeared in the
morning crowd at the springs two persons who attracted universal and
unfavorable attention. These were a tall man with a stooping figure,
and huge hands, in an old coat too short for him, with black, simple,
and yet terrible eyes, and a pockmarked, kind-looking woman, very badly
and tastelessly dressed. Recognizing these persons as Russians, Kitty
had already in her imagination begun constructing a delightful and
touching romance about them. But the princess, having ascertained from
the visitors’ list that this was Nikolay Levin and Marya Nikolaevna,
explained to Kitty what a bad man this Levin was, and all her fancies
about these two people vanished. Not so much from what her mother told
her, as from the fact that it was Konstantin’s brother, this pair
suddenly seemed to Kitty intensely unpleasant. This Levin, with his
continual twitching of his head, aroused in her now an irrepressible
feeling of disgust.

It seemed to her that his big, terrible eyes, which persistently
pursued her, expressed a feeling of hatred and contempt, and she tried
to avoid meeting him.


Chapter 31

It was a wet day; it had been raining all the morning, and the
invalids, with their parasols, had flocked into the arcades.

Kitty was walking there with her mother and the Moscow colonel, smart
and jaunty in his European coat, bought ready-made at Frankfort. They
were walking on one side of the arcade, trying to avoid Levin, who was
walking on the other side. Varenka, in her dark dress, in a black hat
with a turn-down brim, was walking up and down the whole length of the
arcade with a blind Frenchwoman, and, every time she met Kitty, they
exchanged friendly glances.

“Mamma, couldn’t I speak to her?” said Kitty, watching her unknown
friend, and noticing that she was going up to the spring, and that they
might come there together.

“Oh, if you want to so much, I’ll find out about her first and make her
acquaintance myself,” answered her mother. “What do you see in her out
of the way? A companion, she must be. If you like, I’ll make
acquaintance with Madame Stahl; I used to know her _belle-sœur_,” added
the princess, lifting her head haughtily.

Kitty knew that the princess was offended that Madame Stahl had seemed
to avoid making her acquaintance. Kitty did not insist.

“How wonderfully sweet she is!” she said, gazing at Varenka just as she
handed a glass to the Frenchwoman. “Look how natural and sweet it all
is.”

“It’s so funny to see your _engouements_,” said the princess. “No, we’d
better go back,” she added, noticing Levin coming towards them with his
companion and a German doctor, to whom he was talking very noisily and
angrily.

They turned to go back, when suddenly they heard, not noisy talk, but
shouting. Levin, stopping short, was shouting at the doctor, and the
doctor, too, was excited. A crowd gathered about them. The princess and
Kitty beat a hasty retreat, while the colonel joined the crowd to find
out what was the matter.

A few minutes later the colonel overtook them.

“What was it?” inquired the princess.

“Scandalous and disgraceful!” answered the colonel. “The one thing to
be dreaded is meeting Russians abroad. That tall gentleman was abusing
the doctor, flinging all sorts of insults at him because he wasn’t
treating him quite as he liked, and he began waving his stick at him.
It’s simply a scandal!”

“Oh, how unpleasant!” said the princess. “Well, and how did it end?”

“Luckily at that point that ... the one in the mushroom hat ...
intervened. A Russian lady, I think she is,” said the colonel.

“Mademoiselle Varenka?” asked Kitty.

“Yes, yes. She came to the rescue before anyone; she took the man by
the arm and led him away.”

“There, mamma,” said Kitty; “you wonder that I’m enthusiastic about
her.”

The next day, as she watched her unknown friend, Kitty noticed that
Mademoiselle Varenka was already on the same terms with Levin and his
companion as with her other _protégés_. She went up to them, entered
into conversation with them, and served as interpreter for the woman,
who could not speak any foreign language.

Kitty began to entreat her mother still more urgently to let her make
friends with Varenka. And, disagreeable as it was to the princess to
seem to take the first step in wishing to make the acquaintance of
Madame Stahl, who thought fit to give herself airs, she made inquiries
about Varenka, and, having ascertained particulars about her tending to
prove that there could be no harm though little good in the
acquaintance, she herself approached Varenka and made acquaintance with
her.

Choosing a time when her daughter had gone to the spring, while Varenka
had stopped outside the baker’s, the princess went up to her.

“Allow me to make your acquaintance,” she said, with her dignified
smile. “My daughter has lost her heart to you,” she said. “Possibly you
do not know me. I am....”

“That feeling is more than reciprocal, princess,” Varenka answered
hurriedly.

“What a good deed you did yesterday to our poor compatriot!” said the
princess.

Varenka flushed a little. “I don’t remember. I don’t think I did
anything,” she said.

“Why, you saved that Levin from disagreeable consequences.”

“Yes, _sa compagne_ called me, and I tried to pacify him, he’s very
ill, and was dissatisfied with the doctor. I’m used to looking after
such invalids.”

“Yes, I’ve heard you live at Mentone with your aunt—I think—Madame
Stahl: I used to know her _belle-sœur_.”

“No, she’s not my aunt. I call her mamma, but I am not related to her;
I was brought up by her,” answered Varenka, flushing a little again.

This was so simply said, and so sweet was the truthful and candid
expression of her face, that the princess saw why Kitty had taken such
a fancy to Varenka.

“Well, and what’s this Levin going to do?” asked the princess.

“He’s going away,” answered Varenka.

At that instant Kitty came up from the spring beaming with delight that
her mother had become acquainted with her unknown friend.

“Well, see, Kitty, your intense desire to make friends with
Mademoiselle....”

“Varenka,” Varenka put in smiling, “that’s what everyone calls me.”

Kitty blushed with pleasure, and slowly, without speaking, pressed her
new friend’s hand, which did not respond to her pressure, but lay
motionless in her hand. The hand did not respond to her pressure, but
the face of Mademoiselle Varenka glowed with a soft, glad, though
rather mournful smile, that showed large but handsome teeth.

“I have long wished for this too,” she said.

“But you are so busy.”

“Oh, no, I’m not at all busy,” answered Varenka, but at that moment she
had to leave her new friends because two little Russian girls, children
of an invalid, ran up to her.

“Varenka, mamma’s calling!” they cried.

And Varenka went after them.


Chapter 32

The particulars which the princess had learned in regard to Varenka’s
past and her relations with Madame Stahl were as follows:

Madame Stahl, of whom some people said that she had worried her husband
out of his life, while others said it was he who had made her wretched
by his immoral behavior, had always been a woman of weak health and
enthusiastic temperament. When, after her separation from her husband,
she gave birth to her only child, the child had died almost
immediately, and the family of Madame Stahl, knowing her sensibility,
and fearing the news would kill her, had substituted another child, a
baby born the same night and in the same house in Petersburg, the
daughter of the chief cook of the Imperial Household. This was Varenka.
Madame Stahl learned later on that Varenka was not her own child, but
she went on bringing her up, especially as very soon afterwards Varenka
had not a relation of her own living. Madame Stahl had now been living
more than ten years continuously abroad, in the south, never leaving
her couch. And some people said that Madame Stahl had made her social
position as a philanthropic, highly religious woman; other people said
she really was at heart the highly ethical being, living for nothing
but the good of her fellow creatures, which she represented herself to
be. No one knew what her faith was—Catholic, Protestant, or Orthodox.
But one fact was indubitable—she was in amicable relations with the
highest dignitaries of all the churches and sects.

Varenka lived with her all the while abroad, and everyone who knew
Madame Stahl knew and liked Mademoiselle Varenka, as everyone called
her.

Having learned all these facts, the princess found nothing to object to
in her daughter’s intimacy with Varenka, more especially as Varenka’s
breeding and education were of the best—she spoke French and English
extremely well—and what was of the most weight, brought a message from
Madame Stahl expressing her regret that she was prevented by her ill
health from making the acquaintance of the princess.

After getting to know Varenka, Kitty became more and more fascinated by
her friend, and every day she discovered new virtues in her.

The princess, hearing that Varenka had a good voice, asked her to come
and sing to them in the evening.

“Kitty plays, and we have a piano; not a good one, it’s true, but you
will give us so much pleasure,” said the princess with her affected
smile, which Kitty disliked particularly just then, because she noticed
that Varenka had no inclination to sing. Varenka came, however, in the
evening and brought a roll of music with her. The princess had invited
Marya Yevgenyevna and her daughter and the colonel.

Varenka seemed quite unaffected by there being persons present she did
not know, and she went directly to the piano. She could not accompany
herself, but she could sing music at sight very well. Kitty, who played
well, accompanied her.

“You have an extraordinary talent,” the princess said to her after
Varenka had sung the first song extremely well.

Marya Yevgenyevna and her daughter expressed their thanks and
admiration.

“Look,” said the colonel, looking out of the window, “what an audience
has collected to listen to you.” There actually was quite a
considerable crowd under the windows.

“I am very glad it gives you pleasure,” Varenka answered simply.

Kitty looked with pride at her friend. She was enchanted by her talent,
and her voice, and her face, but most of all by her manner, by the way
Varenka obviously thought nothing of her singing and was quite unmoved
by their praises. She seemed only to be asking: “Am I to sing again, or
is that enough?”

“If it had been I,” thought Kitty, “how proud I should have been! How
delighted I should have been to see that crowd under the windows! But
she’s utterly unmoved by it. Her only motive is to avoid refusing and
to please mamma. What is there in her? What is it gives her the power
to look down on everything, to be calm independently of everything? How
I should like to know it and to learn it of her!” thought Kitty, gazing
into her serene face. The princess asked Varenka to sing again, and
Varenka sang another song, also smoothly, distinctly, and well,
standing erect at the piano and beating time on it with her thin,
dark-skinned hand.

The next song in the book was an Italian one. Kitty played the opening
bars, and looked round at Varenka.

“Let’s skip that,” said Varenka, flushing a little. Kitty let her eyes
rest on Varenka’s face, with a look of dismay and inquiry.

“Very well, the next one,” she said hurriedly, turning over the pages,
and at once feeling that there was something connected with the song.

“No,” answered Varenka with a smile, laying her hand on the music, “no,
let’s have that one.” And she sang it just as quietly, as coolly, and
as well as the others.

When she had finished, they all thanked her again, and went off to tea.
Kitty and Varenka went out into the little garden that adjoined the
house.

“Am I right, that you have some reminiscences connected with that
song?” said Kitty. “Don’t tell me,” she added hastily, “only say if I’m
right.”

“No, why not? I’ll tell you simply,” said Varenka, and, without waiting
for a reply, she went on: “Yes, it brings up memories, once painful
ones. I cared for someone once, and I used to sing him that song.”

Kitty with big, wide-open eyes gazed silently, sympathetically at
Varenka.

“I cared for him, and he cared for me; but his mother did not wish it,
and he married another girl. He’s living now not far from us, and I see
him sometimes. You didn’t think I had a love story too,” she said, and
there was a faint gleam in her handsome face of that fire which Kitty
felt must once have glowed all over her.

“I didn’t think so? Why, if I were a man, I could never care for anyone
else after knowing you. Only I can’t understand how he could, to please
his mother, forget you and make you unhappy; he had no heart.”

“Oh, no, he’s a very good man, and I’m not unhappy; quite the contrary,
I’m very happy. Well, so we shan’t be singing any more now,” she added,
turning towards the house.

“How good you are! how good you are!” cried Kitty, and stopping her,
she kissed her. “If I could only be even a little like you!”

“Why should you be like anyone? You’re nice as you are,” said Varenka,
smiling her gentle, weary smile.

“No, I’m not nice at all. Come, tell me.... Stop a minute, let’s sit
down,” said Kitty, making her sit down again beside her. “Tell me,
isn’t it humiliating to think that a man has disdained your love, that
he hasn’t cared for it?...”

“But he didn’t disdain it; I believe he cared for me, but he was a
dutiful son....”

“Yes, but if it hadn’t been on account of his mother, if it had been
his own doing?...” said Kitty, feeling she was giving away her secret,
and that her face, burning with the flush of shame, had betrayed her
already.

“In that case he would have done wrong, and I should not have regretted
him,” answered Varenka, evidently realizing that they were now talking
not of her, but of Kitty.

“But the humiliation,” said Kitty, “the humiliation one can never
forget, can never forget,” she said, remembering her look at the last
ball during the pause in the music.

“Where is the humiliation? Why, you did nothing wrong?”

“Worse than wrong—shameful.”

Varenka shook her head and laid her hand on Kitty’s hand.

“Why, what is there shameful?” she said. “You didn’t tell a man, who
didn’t care for you, that you loved him, did you?”

“Of course not; I never said a word, but he knew it. No, no, there are
looks, there are ways; I can’t forget it, if I live a hundred years.”

“Why so? I don’t understand. The whole point is whether you love him
now or not,” said Varenka, who called everything by its name.

“I hate him; I can’t forgive myself.”

“Why, what for?”

“The shame, the humiliation!”

“Oh! if everyone were as sensitive as you are!” said Varenka. “There
isn’t a girl who hasn’t been through the same. And it’s all so
unimportant.”

“Why, what is important?” said Kitty, looking into her face with
inquisitive wonder.

“Oh, there’s so much that’s important,” said Varenka, smiling.

“Why, what?”

“Oh, so much that’s more important,” answered Varenka, not knowing what
to say. But at that instant they heard the princess’s voice from the
window. “Kitty, it’s cold! Either get a shawl, or come indoors.”

“It really is time to go in!” said Varenka, getting up. “I have to go
on to Madame Berthe’s; she asked me to.”

Kitty held her by the hand, and with passionate curiosity and entreaty
her eyes asked her: “What is it, what is this of such importance that
gives you such tranquillity? You know, tell me!” But Varenka did not
even know what Kitty’s eyes were asking her. She merely thought that
she had to go to see Madame Berthe too that evening, and to make haste
home in time for _maman’s_ tea at twelve o’clock. She went indoors,
collected her music, and saying good-bye to everyone, was about to go.

“Allow me to see you home,” said the colonel.

“Yes, how can you go alone at night like this?” chimed in the princess.
“Anyway, I’ll send Parasha.”

Kitty saw that Varenka could hardly restrain a smile at the idea that
she needed an escort.

“No, I always go about alone and nothing ever happens to me,” she said,
taking her hat. And kissing Kitty once more, without saying what was
important, she stepped out courageously with the music under her arm
and vanished into the twilight of the summer night, bearing away with
her her secret of what was important and what gave her the calm and
dignity so much to be envied.


Chapter 33

Kitty made the acquaintance of Madame Stahl too, and this acquaintance,
together with her friendship with Varenka, did not merely exercise a
great influence on her, it also comforted her in her mental distress.
She found this comfort through a completely new world being opened to
her by means of this acquaintance, a world having nothing in common
with her past, an exalted, noble world, from the height of which she
could contemplate her past calmly. It was revealed to her that besides
the instinctive life to which Kitty had given herself up hitherto there
was a spiritual life. This life was disclosed in religion, but a
religion having nothing in common with that one which Kitty had known
from childhood, and which found expression in litanies and all-night
services at the Widow’s Home, where one might meet one’s friends, and
in learning by heart Slavonic texts with the priest. This was a lofty,
mysterious religion connected with a whole series of noble thoughts and
feelings, which one could do more than merely believe because one was
told to, which one could love.

Kitty found all this out not from words. Madame Stahl talked to Kitty
as to a charming child that one looks on with pleasure as on the memory
of one’s youth, and only once she said in passing that in all human
sorrows nothing gives comfort but love and faith, and that in the sight
of Christ’s compassion for us no sorrow is trifling—and immediately
talked of other things. But in every gesture of Madame Stahl, in every
word, in every heavenly—as Kitty called it—look, and above all in the
whole story of her life, which she heard from Varenka, Kitty recognized
that something “that was important,” of which, till then, she had known
nothing.

Yet, elevated as Madame Stahl’s character was, touching as was her
story, and exalted and moving as was her speech, Kitty could not help
detecting in her some traits which perplexed her. She noticed that when
questioning her about her family, Madame Stahl had smiled
contemptuously, which was not in accord with Christian meekness. She
noticed, too, that when she had found a Catholic priest with her,
Madame Stahl had studiously kept her face in the shadow of the
lamp-shade and had smiled in a peculiar way. Trivial as these two
observations were, they perplexed her, and she had her doubts as to
Madame Stahl. But on the other hand Varenka, alone in the world,
without friends or relations, with a melancholy disappointment in the
past, desiring nothing, regretting nothing, was just that perfection of
which Kitty dared hardly dream. In Varenka she realized that one has
but to forget oneself and love others, and one will be calm, happy, and
noble. And that was what Kitty longed to be. Seeing now clearly what
was _the most important_, Kitty was not satisfied with being
enthusiastic over it; she at once gave herself up with her whole soul
to the new life that was opening to her. From Varenka’s accounts of the
doings of Madame Stahl and other people whom she mentioned, Kitty had
already constructed the plan of her own future life. She would, like
Madame Stahl’s niece, Aline, of whom Varenka had talked to her a great
deal, seek out those who were in trouble, wherever she might be living,
help them as far as she could, give them the Gospel, read the Gospel to
the sick, to criminals, to the dying. The idea of reading the Gospel to
criminals, as Aline did, particularly fascinated Kitty. But all these
were secret dreams, of which Kitty did not talk either to her mother or
to Varenka.

While awaiting the time for carrying out her plans on a large scale,
however, Kitty, even then at the springs, where there were so many
people ill and unhappy, readily found a chance for practicing her new
principles in imitation of Varenka.

At first the princess noticed nothing but that Kitty was much under the
influence of her _engouement_, as she called it, for Madame Stahl, and
still more for Varenka. She saw that Kitty did not merely imitate
Varenka in her conduct, but unconsciously imitated her in her manner of
walking, of talking, of blinking her eyes. But later on the princess
noticed that, apart from this adoration, some kind of serious spiritual
change was taking place in her daughter.

The princess saw that in the evenings Kitty read a French testament
that Madame Stahl had given her—a thing she had never done before; that
she avoided society acquaintances and associated with the sick people
who were under Varenka’s protection, and especially one poor family,
that of a sick painter, Petrov. Kitty was unmistakably proud of playing
the part of a sister of mercy in that family. All this was well enough,
and the princess had nothing to say against it, especially as Petrov’s
wife was a perfectly nice sort of woman, and that the German princess,
noticing Kitty’s devotion, praised her, calling her an angel of
consolation. All this would have been very well, if there had been no
exaggeration. But the princess saw that her daughter was rushing into
extremes, and so indeed she told her.

“_Il ne faut jamais rien outrer_,” she said to her.

Her daughter made her no reply, only in her heart she thought that one
could not talk about exaggeration where Christianity was concerned.
What exaggeration could there be in the practice of a doctrine wherein
one was bidden to turn the other cheek when one was smitten, and give
one’s cloak if one’s coat were taken? But the princess disliked this
exaggeration, and disliked even more the fact that she felt her
daughter did not care to show her all her heart. Kitty did in fact
conceal her new views and feelings from her mother. She concealed them
not because she did not respect or did not love her mother, but simply
because she was her mother. She would have revealed them to anyone
sooner than to her mother.

“How is it Anna Pavlovna’s not been to see us for so long?” the
princess said one day of Madame Petrova. “I’ve asked her, but she seems
put out about something.”

“No, I’ve not noticed it, maman,” said Kitty, flushing hotly.

“Is it long since you went to see them?”

“We’re meaning to make an expedition to the mountains tomorrow,”
answered Kitty.

“Well, you can go,” answered the princess, gazing at her daughter’s
embarrassed face and trying to guess the cause of her embarrassment.

That day Varenka came to dinner and told them that Anna Pavlovna had
changed her mind and given up the expedition for the morrow. And the
princess noticed again that Kitty reddened.

“Kitty, haven’t you had some misunderstanding with the Petrovs?” said
the princess, when they were left alone. “Why has she given up sending
the children and coming to see us?”

Kitty answered that nothing had happened between them, and that she
could not tell why Anna Pavlovna seemed displeased with her. Kitty
answered perfectly truly. She did not know the reason Anna Pavlovna had
changed to her, but she guessed it. She guessed at something which she
could not tell her mother, which she did not put into words to herself.
It was one of those things which one knows but which one can never
speak of even to oneself, so terrible and shameful would it be to be
mistaken.

Again and again she went over in her memory all her relations with the
family. She remembered the simple delight expressed on the round,
good-humored face of Anna Pavlovna at their meetings; she remembered
their secret confabulations about the invalid, their plots to draw him
away from the work which was forbidden him, and to get him
out-of-doors; the devotion of the youngest boy, who used to call her
“my Kitty,” and would not go to bed without her. How nice it all was!
Then she recalled the thin, terribly thin figure of Petrov, with his
long neck, in his brown coat, his scant, curly hair, his questioning
blue eyes that were so terrible to Kitty at first, and his painful
attempts to seem hearty and lively in her presence. She recalled the
efforts she had made at first to overcome the repugnance she felt for
him, as for all consumptive people, and the pains it had cost her to
think of things to say to him. She recalled the timid, softened look
with which he gazed at her, and the strange feeling of compassion and
awkwardness, and later of a sense of her own goodness, which she had
felt at it. How nice it all was! But all that was at first. Now, a few
days ago, everything was suddenly spoiled. Anna Pavlovna had met Kitty
with affected cordiality, and had kept continual watch on her and on
her husband.

Could that touching pleasure he showed when she came near be the cause
of Anna Pavlovna’s coolness?

“Yes,” she mused, “there was something unnatural about Anna Pavlovna,
and utterly unlike her good nature, when she said angrily the day
before yesterday: ‘There, he will keep waiting for you; he wouldn’t
drink his coffee without you, though he’s grown so dreadfully weak.’”

“Yes, perhaps, too, she didn’t like it when I gave him the rug. It was
all so simple, but he took it so awkwardly, and was so long thanking
me, that I felt awkward too. And then that portrait of me he did so
well. And most of all that look of confusion and tenderness! Yes, yes,
that’s it!” Kitty repeated to herself with horror. “No, it can’t be, it
oughtn’t to be! He’s so much to be pitied!” she said to herself
directly after.

This doubt poisoned the charm of her new life.


Chapter 34

Before the end of the course of drinking the waters, Prince
Shtcherbatsky, who had gone on from Carlsbad to Baden and Kissingen to
Russian friends—to get a breath of Russian air, as he said—came back to
his wife and daughter.

The views of the prince and of the princess on life abroad were
completely opposed. The princess thought everything delightful, and in
spite of her established position in Russian society, she tried abroad
to be like a European fashionable lady, which she was not—for the
simple reason that she was a typical Russian gentlewoman; and so she
was affected, which did not altogether suit her. The prince, on the
contrary, thought everything foreign detestable, got sick of European
life, kept to his Russian habits, and purposely tried to show himself
abroad less European than he was in reality.

The prince returned thinner, with the skin hanging in loose bags on his
cheeks, but in the most cheerful frame of mind. His good humor was even
greater when he saw Kitty completely recovered. The news of Kitty’s
friendship with Madame Stahl and Varenka, and the reports the princess
gave him of some kind of change she had noticed in Kitty, troubled the
prince and aroused his habitual feeling of jealousy of everything that
drew his daughter away from him, and a dread that his daughter might
have got out of the reach of his influence into regions inaccessible to
him. But these unpleasant matters were all drowned in the sea of
kindliness and good humor which was always within him, and more so than
ever since his course of Carlsbad waters.

The day after his arrival the prince, in his long overcoat, with his
Russian wrinkles and baggy cheeks propped up by a starched collar, set
off with his daughter to the spring in the greatest good humor.

It was a lovely morning: the bright, cheerful houses with their little
gardens, the sight of the red-faced, red-armed, beer-drinking German
waitresses, working away merrily, did the heart good. But the nearer
they got to the springs the oftener they met sick people; and their
appearance seemed more pitiable than ever among the everyday conditions
of prosperous German life. Kitty was no longer struck by this contrast.
The bright sun, the brilliant green of the foliage, the strains of the
music were for her the natural setting of all these familiar faces,
with their changes to greater emaciation or to convalescence, for which
she watched. But to the prince the brightness and gaiety of the June
morning, and the sound of the orchestra playing a gay waltz then in
fashion, and above all, the appearance of the healthy attendants,
seemed something unseemly and monstrous, in conjunction with these
slowly moving, dying figures gathered together from all parts of
Europe. In spite of his feeling of pride and, as it were, of the return
of youth, with his favorite daughter on his arm, he felt awkward, and
almost ashamed of his vigorous step and his sturdy, stout limbs. He
felt almost like a man not dressed in a crowd.

“Present me to your new friends,” he said to his daughter, squeezing
her hand with his elbow. “I like even your horrid Soden for making you
so well again. Only it’s melancholy, very melancholy here. Who’s that?”

Kitty mentioned the names of all the people they met, with some of whom
she was acquainted and some not. At the entrance of the garden they met
the blind lady, Madame Berthe, with her guide, and the prince was
delighted to see the old Frenchwoman’s face light up when she heard
Kitty’s voice. She at once began talking to him with French exaggerated
politeness, applauding him for having such a delightful daughter,
extolling Kitty to the skies before her face, and calling her a
treasure, a pearl, and a consoling angel.

“Well, she’s the second angel, then,” said the prince, smiling. “she
calls Mademoiselle Varenka angel number one.”

“Oh! Mademoiselle Varenka, she’s a real angel, allez,” Madame Berthe
assented.

In the arcade they met Varenka herself. She was walking rapidly towards
them carrying an elegant red bag.

“Here is papa come,” Kitty said to her.

Varenka made—simply and naturally as she did everything—a movement
between a bow and a curtsey, and immediately began talking to the
prince, without shyness, naturally, as she talked to everyone.

“Of course I know you; I know you very well,” the prince said to her
with a smile, in which Kitty detected with joy that her father liked
her friend. “Where are you off to in such haste?”

“Maman’s here,” she said, turning to Kitty. “She has not slept all
night, and the doctor advised her to go out. I’m taking her her work.”

“So that’s angel number one?” said the prince when Varenka had gone on.

Kitty saw that her father had meant to make fun of Varenka, but that he
could not do it because he liked her.

“Come, so we shall see all your friends,” he went on, “even Madame
Stahl, if she deigns to recognize me.”

“Why, did you know her, papa?” Kitty asked apprehensively, catching the
gleam of irony that kindled in the prince’s eyes at the mention of
Madame Stahl.

“I used to know her husband, and her too a little, before she’d joined
the Pietists.”

“What is a Pietist, papa?” asked Kitty, dismayed to find that what she
prized so highly in Madame Stahl had a name.

“I don’t quite know myself. I only know that she thanks God for
everything, for every misfortune, and thanks God too that her husband
died. And that’s rather droll, as they didn’t get on together.”

“Who’s that? What a piteous face!” he asked, noticing a sick man of
medium height sitting on a bench, wearing a brown overcoat and white
trousers that fell in strange folds about his long, fleshless legs.
This man lifted his straw hat, showed his scanty curly hair and high
forehead, painfully reddened by the pressure of the hat.

“That’s Petrov, an artist,” answered Kitty, blushing. “And that’s his
wife,” she added, indicating Anna Pavlovna, who, as though on purpose,
at the very instant they approached walked away after a child that had
run off along a path.

“Poor fellow! and what a nice face he has!” said the prince. “Why don’t
you go up to him? He wanted to speak to you.”

“Well, let us go, then,” said Kitty, turning round resolutely. “How are
you feeling today?” she asked Petrov.

Petrov got up, leaning on his stick, and looked shyly at the prince.

“This is my daughter,” said the prince. “Let me introduce myself.”

The painter bowed and smiled, showing his strangely dazzling white
teeth.

“We expected you yesterday, princess,” he said to Kitty. He staggered
as he said this, and then repeated the motion, trying to make it seem
as if it had been intentional.

“I meant to come, but Varenka said that Anna Pavlovna sent word you
were not going.”

“Not going!” said Petrov, blushing, and immediately beginning to cough,
and his eyes sought his wife. “Anita! Anita!” he said loudly, and the
swollen veins stood out like cords on his thin white neck.

Anna Pavlovna came up.

“So you sent word to the princess that we weren’t going!” he whispered
to her angrily, losing his voice.

“Good morning, princess,” said Anna Pavlovna, with an assumed smile
utterly unlike her former manner. “Very glad to make your
acquaintance,” she said to the prince. “You’ve long been expected,
prince.”

“What did you send word to the princess that we weren’t going for?” the
artist whispered hoarsely once more, still more angrily, obviously
exasperated that his voice failed him so that he could not give his
words the expression he would have liked to.

“Oh, mercy on us! I thought we weren’t going,” his wife answered
crossly.

“What, when....” He coughed and waved his hand. The prince took off his
hat and moved away with his daughter.

“Ah! ah!” he sighed deeply. “Oh, poor things!”

“Yes, papa,” answered Kitty. “And you must know they’ve three children,
no servant, and scarcely any means. He gets something from the
Academy,” she went on briskly, trying to drown the distress that the
queer change in Anna Pavlovna’s manner to her had aroused in her.

“Oh, here’s Madame Stahl,” said Kitty, indicating an invalid carriage,
where, propped on pillows, something in gray and blue was lying under a
sunshade. This was Madame Stahl. Behind her stood the gloomy,
healthy-looking German workman who pushed the carriage. Close by was
standing a flaxen-headed Swedish count, whom Kitty knew by name.
Several invalids were lingering near the low carriage, staring at the
lady as though she were some curiosity.

The prince went up to her, and Kitty detected that disconcerting gleam
of irony in his eyes. He went up to Madame Stahl, and addressed her
with extreme courtesy and affability in that excellent French that so
few speak nowadays.

“I don’t know if you remember me, but I must recall myself to thank you
for your kindness to my daughter,” he said, taking off his hat and not
putting it on again.

“Prince Alexander Shtcherbatsky,” said Madame Stahl, lifting upon him
her heavenly eyes, in which Kitty discerned a look of annoyance.
“Delighted! I have taken a great fancy to your daughter.”

“You are still in weak health?”

“Yes; I’m used to it,” said Madame Stahl, and she introduced the prince
to the Swedish count.

“You are scarcely changed at all,” the prince said to her. “It’s ten or
eleven years since I had the honor of seeing you.”

“Yes; God sends the cross and sends the strength to bear it. Often one
wonders what is the goal of this life?... The other side!” she said
angrily to Varenka, who had rearranged the rug over her feet not to her
satisfaction.

“To do good, probably,” said the prince with a twinkle in his eye.

“That is not for us to judge,” said Madame Stahl, perceiving the shade
of expression on the prince’s face. “So you will send me that book,
dear count? I’m very grateful to you,” she said to the young Swede.

“Ah!” cried the prince, catching sight of the Moscow colonel standing
near, and with a bow to Madame Stahl he walked away with his daughter
and the Moscow colonel, who joined them.

“That’s our aristocracy, prince!” the Moscow colonel said with ironical
intention. He cherished a grudge against Madame Stahl for not making
his acquaintance.

“She’s just the same,” replied the prince.

“Did you know her before her illness, prince—that’s to say before she
took to her bed?”

“Yes. She took to her bed before my eyes,” said the prince.

“They say it’s ten years since she has stood on her feet.”

“She doesn’t stand up because her legs are too short. She’s a very bad
figure.”

“Papa, it’s not possible!” cried Kitty.

“That’s what wicked tongues say, my darling. And your Varenka catches
it too,” he added. “Oh, these invalid ladies!”

“Oh, no, papa!” Kitty objected warmly. “Varenka worships her. And then
she does so much good! Ask anyone! Everyone knows her and Aline Stahl.”

“Perhaps so,” said the prince, squeezing her hand with his elbow; “but
it’s better when one does good so that you may ask everyone and no one
knows.”

Kitty did not answer, not because she had nothing to say, but because
she did not care to reveal her secret thoughts even to her father. But,
strange to say, although she had so made up her mind not to be
influenced by her father’s views, not to let him into her inmost
sanctuary, she felt that the heavenly image of Madame Stahl, which she
had carried for a whole month in her heart, had vanished, never to
return, just as the fantastic figure made up of some clothes thrown
down at random vanishes when one sees that it is only some garment
lying there. All that was left was a woman with short legs, who lay
down because she had a bad figure, and worried patient Varenka for not
arranging her rug to her liking. And by no effort of the imagination
could Kitty bring back the former Madame Stahl.


Chapter 35

The prince communicated his good humor to his own family and his
friends, and even to the German landlord in whose rooms the
Shtcherbatskys were staying.

On coming back with Kitty from the springs, the prince, who had asked
the colonel, and Marya Yevgenyevna, and Varenka all to come and have
coffee with them, gave orders for a table and chairs to be taken into
the garden under the chestnut tree, and lunch to be laid there. The
landlord and the servants, too, grew brisker under the influence of his
good spirits. They knew his open-handedness; and half an hour later the
invalid doctor from Hamburg, who lived on the top floor, looked
enviously out of the window at the merry party of healthy Russians
assembled under the chestnut tree. In the trembling circles of shadow
cast by the leaves, at a table, covered with a white cloth, and set
with coffeepot, bread-and-butter, cheese, and cold game, sat the
princess in a high cap with lilac ribbons, distributing cups and
bread-and-butter. At the other end sat the prince, eating heartily, and
talking loudly and merrily. The prince had spread out near him his
purchases, carved boxes, and knick-knacks, paper-knives of all sorts,
of which he bought a heap at every watering-place, and bestowed them
upon everyone, including Lieschen, the servant girl, and the landlord,
with whom he jested in his comically bad German, assuring him that it
was not the water had cured Kitty, but his splendid cookery, especially
his plum soup. The princess laughed at her husband for his Russian
ways, but she was more lively and good-humored than she had been all
the while she had been at the waters. The colonel smiled, as he always
did, at the prince’s jokes, but as far as regards Europe, of which he
believed himself to be making a careful study, he took the princess’s
side. The simple-hearted Marya Yevgenyevna simply roared with laughter
at everything absurd the prince said, and his jokes made Varenka
helpless with feeble but infectious laughter, which was something Kitty
had never seen before.

Kitty was glad of all this, but she could not be light-hearted. She
could not solve the problem her father had unconsciously set her by his
good-humored view of her friends, and of the life that had so attracted
her. To this doubt there was joined the change in her relations with
the Petrovs, which had been so conspicuously and unpleasantly marked
that morning. Everyone was good-humored, but Kitty could not feel
good-humored, and this increased her distress. She felt a feeling such
as she had known in childhood, when she had been shut in her room as a
punishment, and had heard her sisters’ merry laughter outside.

“Well, but what did you buy this mass of things for?” said the
princess, smiling, and handing her husband a cup of coffee.

“One goes for a walk, one looks in a shop, and they ask you to buy.
‘_Erlaucht, Durchlaucht?_’ Directly they say ‘_Durchlaucht_,’ I can’t
hold out. I lose ten thalers.”

“It’s simply from boredom,” said the princess.

“Of course it is. Such boredom, my dear, that one doesn’t know what to
do with oneself.”

“How can you be bored, prince? There’s so much that’s interesting now
in Germany,” said Marya Yevgenyevna.

“But I know everything that’s interesting: the plum soup I know, and
the pea sausages I know. I know everything.”

“No, you may say what you like, prince, there’s the interest of their
institutions,” said the colonel.

“But what is there interesting about it? They’re all as pleased as
brass halfpence. They’ve conquered everybody, and why am I to be
pleased at that? I haven’t conquered anyone; and I’m obliged to take
off my own boots, yes, and put them away too; in the morning, get up
and dress at once, and go to the dining-room to drink bad tea! How
different it is at home! You get up in no haste, you get cross, grumble
a little, and come round again. You’ve time to think things over, and
no hurry.”

“But time’s money, you forget that,” said the colonel.

“Time, indeed, that depends! Why, there’s time one would give a month
of for sixpence, and time you wouldn’t give half an hour of for any
money. Isn’t that so, Katinka? What is it? why are you so depressed?”

“I’m not depressed.”

“Where are you off to? Stay a little longer,” he said to Varenka.

“I must be going home,” said Varenka, getting up, and again she went
off into a giggle. When she had recovered, she said good-bye, and went
into the house to get her hat.

Kitty followed her. Even Varenka struck her as different. She was not
worse, but different from what she had fancied her before.

“Oh, dear! it’s a long while since I’ve laughed so much!” said Varenka,
gathering up her parasol and her bag. “How nice he is, your father!”

Kitty did not speak.

“When shall I see you again?” asked Varenka.

“Mamma meant to go and see the Petrovs. Won’t you be there?” said
Kitty, to try Varenka.

“Yes,” answered Varenka. “They’re getting ready to go away, so I
promised to help them pack.”

“Well, I’ll come too, then.”

“No, why should you?”

“Why not? why not? why not?” said Kitty, opening her eyes wide, and
clutching at Varenka’s parasol, so as not to let her go. “No, wait a
minute; why not?”

“Oh, nothing; your father has come, and besides, they will feel awkward
at your helping.”

“No, tell me why you don’t want me to be often at the Petrovs’. You
don’t want me to—why not?”

“I didn’t say that,” said Varenka quietly.

“No, please tell me!”

“Tell you everything?” asked Varenka.

“Everything, everything!” Kitty assented.

“Well, there’s really nothing of any consequence; only that Mihail
Alexeyevitch” (that was the artist’s name) “had meant to leave earlier,
and now he doesn’t want to go away,” said Varenka, smiling.

“Well, well!” Kitty urged impatiently, looking darkly at Varenka.

“Well, and for some reason Anna Pavlovna told him that he didn’t want
to go because you are here. Of course, that was nonsense; but there was
a dispute over it—over you. You know how irritable these sick people
are.”

Kitty, scowling more than ever, kept silent, and Varenka went on
speaking alone, trying to soften or soothe her, and seeing a storm
coming—she did not know whether of tears or of words.

“So you’d better not go.... You understand; you won’t be offended?...”

“And it serves me right! And it serves me right!” Kitty cried quickly,
snatching the parasol out of Varenka’s hand, and looking past her
friend’s face.

Varenka felt inclined to smile, looking at her childish fury, but she
was afraid of wounding her.

“How does it serve you right? I don’t understand,” she said.

“It serves me right, because it was all sham; because it was all done
on purpose, and not from the heart. What business had I to interfere
with outsiders? And so it’s come about that I’m a cause of quarrel, and
that I’ve done what nobody asked me to do. Because it was all a sham! a
sham! a sham!...”

“A sham! with what object?” said Varenka gently.

“Oh, it’s so idiotic! so hateful! There was no need whatever for me....
Nothing but sham!” she said, opening and shutting the parasol.

“But with what object?”

“To seem better to people, to myself, to God; to deceive everyone. No!
now I won’t descend to that. I’ll be bad; but anyway not a liar, a
cheat.”

“But who is a cheat?” said Varenka reproachfully. “You speak as if....”

But Kitty was in one of her gusts of fury, and she would not let her
finish.

“I don’t talk about you, not about you at all. You’re perfection. Yes,
yes, I know you’re all perfection; but what am I to do if I’m bad? This
would never have been if I weren’t bad. So let me be what I am. I won’t
be a sham. What have I to do with Anna Pavlovna? Let them go their way,
and me go mine. I can’t be different.... And yet it’s not that, it’s
not that.”

“What is not that?” asked Varenka in bewilderment.

“Everything. I can’t act except from the heart, and you act from
principle. I liked you simply, but you most likely only wanted to save
me, to improve me.”

“You are unjust,” said Varenka.

“But I’m not speaking of other people, I’m speaking of myself.”

“Kitty,” they heard her mother’s voice, “come here, show papa your
necklace.”

Kitty, with a haughty air, without making peace with her friend, took
the necklace in a little box from the table and went to her mother.

“What’s the matter? Why are you so red?” her mother and father said to
her with one voice.

“Nothing,” she answered. “I’ll be back directly,” and she ran back.

“She’s still here,” she thought. “What am I to say to her? Oh, dear!
what have I done, what have I said? Why was I rude to her? What am I to
do? What am I to say to her?” thought Kitty, and she stopped in the
doorway.

Varenka in her hat and with the parasol in her hands was sitting at the
table examining the spring which Kitty had broken. She lifted her head.

“Varenka, forgive me, do forgive me,” whispered Kitty, going up to her.
“I don’t remember what I said. I....”

“I really didn’t mean to hurt you,” said Varenka, smiling.

Peace was made. But with her father’s coming all the world in which she
had been living was transformed for Kitty. She did not give up
everything she had learned, but she became aware that she had deceived
herself in supposing she could be what she wanted to be. Her eyes were,
it seemed, opened; she felt all the difficulty of maintaining herself
without hypocrisy and self-conceit on the pinnacle to which she had
wished to mount. Moreover, she became aware of all the dreariness of
the world of sorrow, of sick and dying people, in which she had been
living. The efforts she had made to like it seemed to her intolerable,
and she felt a longing to get back quickly into the fresh air, to
Russia, to Ergushovo, where, as she knew from letters, her sister Dolly
had already gone with her children.

But her affection for Varenka did not wane. As she said good-bye, Kitty
begged her to come to them in Russia.

“I’ll come when you get married,” said Varenka.

“I shall never marry.”

“Well, then, I shall never come.”

“Well, then, I shall be married simply for that. Mind now, remember
your promise,” said Kitty.

The doctor’s prediction was fulfilled. Kitty returned home to Russia
cured. She was not so gay and thoughtless as before, but she was
serene. Her Moscow troubles had become a memory to her.




PART THREE

Chapter 1


Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev wanted a rest from mental work, and instead
of going abroad as he usually did, he came towards the end of May to
stay in the country with his brother. In his judgment the best sort of
life was a country life. He had come now to enjoy such a life at his
brother’s. Konstantin Levin was very glad to have him, especially as he
did not expect his brother Nikolay that summer. But in spite of his
affection and respect for Sergey Ivanovitch, Konstantin Levin was
uncomfortable with his brother in the country. It made him
uncomfortable, and it positively annoyed him to see his brother’s
attitude to the country. To Konstantin Levin the country was the
background of life, that is of pleasures, endeavors, labor. To Sergey
Ivanovitch the country meant on one hand rest from work, on the other a
valuable antidote to the corrupt influences of town, which he took with
satisfaction and a sense of its utility. To Konstantin Levin the
country was good first because it afforded a field for labor, of the
usefulness of which there could be no doubt. To Sergey Ivanovitch the
country was particularly good, because there it was possible and
fitting to do nothing. Moreover, Sergey Ivanovitch’s attitude to the
peasants rather piqued Konstantin. Sergey Ivanovitch used to say that
he knew and liked the peasantry, and he often talked to the peasants,
which he knew how to do without affectation or condescension, and from
every such conversation he would deduce general conclusions in favor of
the peasantry and in confirmation of his knowing them. Konstantin Levin
did not like such an attitude to the peasants. To Konstantin the
peasant was simply the chief partner in their common labor, and in
spite of all the respect and the love, almost like that of kinship, he
had for the peasant—sucked in probably, as he said himself, with the
milk of his peasant nurse—still as a fellow-worker with him, while
sometimes enthusiastic over the vigor, gentleness, and justice of these
men, he was very often, when their common labors called for other
qualities, exasperated with the peasant for his carelessness, lack of
method, drunkenness, and lying. If he had been asked whether he liked
or didn’t like the peasants, Konstantin Levin would have been
absolutely at a loss what to reply. He liked and did not like the
peasants, just as he liked and did not like men in general. Of course,
being a good-hearted man, he liked men rather than he disliked them,
and so too with the peasants. But like or dislike “the people” as
something apart he could not, not only because he lived with “the
people,” and all his interests were bound up with theirs, but also
because he regarded himself as a part of “the people,” did not see any
special qualities or failings distinguishing himself and “the people,”
and could not contrast himself with them. Moreover, although he had
lived so long in the closest relations with the peasants, as farmer and
arbitrator, and what was more, as adviser (the peasants trusted him,
and for thirty miles round they would come to ask his advice), he had
no definite views of “the people,” and would have been as much at a
loss to answer the question whether he knew “the people” as the
question whether he liked them. For him to say he knew the peasantry
would have been the same as to say he knew men. He was continually
watching and getting to know people of all sorts, and among them
peasants, whom he regarded as good and interesting people, and he was
continually observing new points in them, altering his former views of
them and forming new ones. With Sergey Ivanovitch it was quite the
contrary. Just as he liked and praised a country life in comparison
with the life he did not like, so too he liked the peasantry in
contradistinction to the class of men he did not like, and so too he
knew the peasantry as something distinct from and opposed to men
generally. In his methodical brain there were distinctly formulated
certain aspects of peasant life, deduced partly from that life itself,
but chiefly from contrast with other modes of life. He never changed
his opinion of the peasantry and his sympathetic attitude towards them.

In the discussions that arose between the brothers on their views of
the peasantry, Sergey Ivanovitch always got the better of his brother,
precisely because Sergey Ivanovitch had definite ideas about the
peasant—his character, his qualities, and his tastes. Konstantin Levin
had no definite and unalterable idea on the subject, and so in their
arguments Konstantin was readily convicted of contradicting himself.

In Sergey Ivanovitch’s eyes his younger brother was a capital fellow,
_with his heart in the right place_ (as he expressed it in French), but
with a mind which, though fairly quick, was too much influenced by the
impressions of the moment, and consequently filled with contradictions.
With all the condescension of an elder brother he sometimes explained
to him the true import of things, but he derived little satisfaction
from arguing with him because he got the better of him too easily.

Konstantin Levin regarded his brother as a man of immense intellect and
culture, as generous in the highest sense of the word, and possessed of
a special faculty for working for the public good. But in the depths of
his heart, the older he became, and the more intimately he knew his
brother, the more and more frequently the thought struck him that this
faculty of working for the public good, of which he felt himself
utterly devoid, was possibly not so much a quality as a lack of
something—not a lack of good, honest, noble desires and tastes, but a
lack of vital force, of what is called heart, of that impulse which
drives a man to choose someone out of the innumerable paths of life,
and to care only for that one. The better he knew his brother, the more
he noticed that Sergey Ivanovitch, and many other people who worked for
the public welfare, were not led by an impulse of the heart to care for
the public good, but reasoned from intellectual considerations that it
was a right thing to take interest in public affairs, and consequently
took interest in them. Levin was confirmed in this generalization by
observing that his brother did not take questions affecting the public
welfare or the question of the immortality of the soul a bit more to
heart than he did chess problems, or the ingenious construction of a
new machine.

Besides this, Konstantin Levin was not at his ease with his brother,
because in summer in the country Levin was continually busy with work
on the land, and the long summer day was not long enough for him to get
through all he had to do, while Sergey Ivanovitch was taking a holiday.
But though he was taking a holiday now, that is to say, he was doing no
writing, he was so used to intellectual activity that he liked to put
into concise and eloquent shape the ideas that occurred to him, and
liked to have someone to listen to him. His most usual and natural
listener was his brother. And so in spite of the friendliness and
directness of their relations, Konstantin felt an awkwardness in
leaving him alone. Sergey Ivanovitch liked to stretch himself on the
grass in the sun, and to lie so, basking and chatting lazily.

“You wouldn’t believe,” he would say to his brother, “what a pleasure
this rural laziness is to me. Not an idea in one’s brain, as empty as a
drum!”

But Konstantin Levin found it dull sitting and listening to him,
especially when he knew that while he was away they would be carting
dung onto the fields not ploughed ready for it, and heaping it all up
anyhow; and would not screw the shares in the ploughs, but would let
them come off and then say that the new ploughs were a silly invention,
and there was nothing like the old Andreevna plough, and so on.

“Come, you’ve done enough trudging about in the heat,” Sergey
Ivanovitch would say to him.

“No, I must just run round to the counting-house for a minute,” Levin
would answer, and he would run off to the fields.


Chapter 2

Early in June it happened that Agafea Mihalovna, the old nurse and
housekeeper, in carrying to the cellar a jar of mushrooms she had just
pickled, slipped, fell, and sprained her wrist. The district doctor, a
talkative young medical student, who had just finished his studies,
came to see her. He examined the wrist, said it was not broken, was
delighted at a chance of talking to the celebrated Sergey Ivanovitch
Koznishev, and to show his advanced views of things told him all the
scandal of the district, complaining of the poor state into which the
district council had fallen. Sergey Ivanovitch listened attentively,
asked him questions, and, roused by a new listener, he talked fluently,
uttered a few keen and weighty observations, respectfully appreciated
by the young doctor, and was soon in that eager frame of mind his
brother knew so well, which always, with him, followed a brilliant and
eager conversation. After the departure of the doctor, he wanted to go
with a fishing rod to the river. Sergey Ivanovitch was fond of angling,
and was, it seemed, proud of being able to care for such a stupid
occupation.

Konstantin Levin, whose presence was needed in the plough land and
meadows, had come to take his brother in the trap.

It was that time of the year, the turning-point of summer, when the
crops of the present year are a certainty, when one begins to think of
the sowing for next year, and the mowing is at hand; when the rye is
all in ear, though its ears are still light, not yet full, and it waves
in gray-green billows in the wind; when the green oats, with tufts of
yellow grass scattered here and there among it, droop irregularly over
the late-sown fields; when the early buckwheat is already out and
hiding the ground; when the fallow lands, trodden hard as stone by the
cattle, are half ploughed over, with paths left untouched by the
plough; when from the dry dung-heaps carted onto the fields there comes
at sunset a smell of manure mixed with meadow-sweet, and on the
low-lying lands the riverside meadows are a thick sea of grass waiting
for the mowing, with blackened heaps of the stalks of sorrel among it.

It was the time when there comes a brief pause in the toil of the
fields before the beginning of the labors of harvest—every year
recurring, every year straining every nerve of the peasants. The crop
was a splendid one, and bright, hot summer days had set in with short,
dewy nights.

The brothers had to drive through the woods to reach the meadows.
Sergey Ivanovitch was all the while admiring the beauty of the woods,
which were a tangled mass of leaves, pointing out to his brother now an
old lime tree on the point of flowering, dark on the shady side, and
brightly spotted with yellow stipules, now the young shoots of this
year’s saplings brilliant with emerald. Konstantin Levin did not like
talking and hearing about the beauty of nature. Words for him took away
the beauty of what he saw. He assented to what his brother said, but he
could not help beginning to think of other things. When they came out
of the woods, all his attention was engrossed by the view of the fallow
land on the upland, in parts yellow with grass, in parts trampled and
checkered with furrows, in parts dotted with ridges of dung, and in
parts even ploughed. A string of carts was moving across it. Levin
counted the carts, and was pleased that all that were wanted had been
brought, and at the sight of the meadows his thoughts passed to the
mowing. He always felt something special moving him to the quick at the
hay-making. On reaching the meadow Levin stopped the horse.

The morning dew was still lying on the thick undergrowth of the grass,
and that he might not get his feet wet, Sergey Ivanovitch asked his
brother to drive him in the trap up to the willow tree from which the
carp was caught. Sorry as Konstantin Levin was to crush down his mowing
grass, he drove him into the meadow. The high grass softly turned about
the wheels and the horse’s legs, leaving its seeds clinging to the wet
axles and spokes of the wheels. His brother seated himself under a
bush, arranging his tackle, while Levin led the horse away, fastened
him up, and walked into the vast gray-green sea of grass unstirred by
the wind. The silky grass with its ripe seeds came almost to his waist
in the dampest spots.

Crossing the meadow, Konstantin Levin came out onto the road, and met
an old man with a swollen eye, carrying a skep on his shoulder.

“What? taken a stray swarm, Fomitch?” he asked.

“No, indeed, Konstantin Dmitrich! All we can do to keep our own! This
is the second swarm that has flown away.... Luckily the lads caught
them. They were ploughing your field. They unyoked the horses and
galloped after them.”

“Well, what do you say, Fomitch—start mowing or wait a bit?”

“Eh, well. Our way’s to wait till St. Peter’s Day. But you always mow
sooner. Well, to be sure, please God, the hay’s good. There’ll be
plenty for the beasts.”

“What do you think about the weather?”

“That’s in God’s hands. Maybe it will be fine.”

Levin went up to his brother.

Sergey Ivanovitch had caught nothing, but he was not bored, and seemed
in the most cheerful frame of mind. Levin saw that, stimulated by his
conversation with the doctor, he wanted to talk. Levin, on the other
hand, would have liked to get home as soon as possible to give orders
about getting together the mowers for next day, and to set at rest his
doubts about the mowing, which greatly absorbed him.

“Well, let’s be going,” he said.

“Why be in such a hurry? Let’s stay a little. But how wet you are! Even
though one catches nothing, it’s nice. That’s the best thing about
every part of sport, that one has to do with nature. How exquisite this
steely water is!” said Sergey Ivanovitch. “These riverside banks always
remind me of the riddle—do you know it? ‘The grass says to the water:
we quiver and we quiver.’”

“I don’t know the riddle,” answered Levin wearily.


Chapter 3

“Do you know, I’ve been thinking about you,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.
“It’s beyond everything what’s being done in the district, according to
what this doctor tells me. He’s a very intelligent fellow. And as I’ve
told you before, I tell you again: it’s not right for you not to go to
the meetings, and altogether to keep out of the district business. If
decent people won’t go into it, of course it’s bound to go all wrong.
We pay the money, and it all goes in salaries, and there are no
schools, nor district nurses, nor midwives, nor drugstores—nothing.”

“Well, I did try, you know,” Levin said slowly and unwillingly. “I
can’t! and so there’s no help for it.”

“But why can’t you? I must own I can’t make it out. Indifference,
incapacity—I won’t admit; surely it’s not simply laziness?”

“None of those things. I’ve tried, and I see I can do nothing,” said
Levin.

He had hardly grasped what his brother was saying. Looking towards the
plough land across the river, he made out something black, but he could
not distinguish whether it was a horse or the bailiff on horseback.

“Why is it you can do nothing? You made an attempt and didn’t succeed,
as you think, and you give in. How can you have so little
self-respect?”

“Self-respect!” said Levin, stung to the quick by his brother’s words;
“I don’t understand. If they’d told me at college that other people
understood the integral calculus, and I didn’t, then pride would have
come in. But in this case one wants first to be convinced that one has
certain qualifications for this sort of business, and especially that
all this business is of great importance.”

“What! do you mean to say it’s not of importance?” said Sergey
Ivanovitch, stung to the quick too at his brother’s considering
anything of no importance that interested him, and still more at his
obviously paying little attention to what he was saying.

“I don’t think it important; it does not take hold of me, I can’t help
it,” answered Levin, making out that what he saw was the bailiff, and
that the bailiff seemed to be letting the peasants go off the ploughed
land. They were turning the plough over. “Can they have finished
ploughing?” he wondered.

“Come, really though,” said the elder brother, with a frown on his
handsome, clever face, “there’s a limit to everything. It’s very well
to be original and genuine, and to dislike everything conventional—I
know all about that; but really, what you’re saying either has no
meaning, or it has a very wrong meaning. How can you think it a matter
of no importance whether the peasant, whom you love as you assert....”

“I never did assert it,” thought Konstantin Levin.

“...dies without help? The ignorant peasant-women starve the children,
and the people stagnate in darkness, and are helpless in the hands of
every village clerk, while you have at your disposal a means of helping
them, and don’t help them because to your mind it’s of no importance.”

And Sergey Ivanovitch put before him the alternative: either you are so
undeveloped that you can’t see all that you can do, or you won’t
sacrifice your ease, your vanity, or whatever it is, to do it.

Konstantin Levin felt that there was no course open to him but to
submit, or to confess to a lack of zeal for the public good. And this
mortified him and hurt his feelings.

“It’s both,” he said resolutely: “I don’t see that it was possible....”

“What! was it impossible, if the money were properly laid out, to
provide medical aid?”

“Impossible, as it seems to me.... For the three thousand square miles
of our district, what with our thaws, and the storms, and the work in
the fields, I don’t see how it is possible to provide medical aid all
over. And besides, I don’t believe in medicine.”

“Oh, well, that’s unfair ... I can quote to you thousands of
instances.... But the schools, anyway.”

“Why have schools?”

“What do you mean? Can there be two opinions of the advantage of
education? If it’s a good thing for you, it’s a good thing for
everyone.”

Konstantin Levin felt himself morally pinned against a wall, and so he
got hot, and unconsciously blurted out the chief cause of his
indifference to public business.

“Perhaps it may all be very good; but why should I worry myself about
establishing dispensaries which I shall never make use of, and schools
to which I shall never send my children, to which even the peasants
don’t want to send their children, and to which I’ve no very firm faith
that they ought to send them?” said he.

Sergey Ivanovitch was for a minute surprised at this unexpected view of
the subject; but he promptly made a new plan of attack. He was silent
for a little, drew out a hook, threw it in again, and turned to his
brother smiling.

“Come, now.... In the first place, the dispensary is needed. We
ourselves sent for the district doctor for Agafea Mihalovna.”

“Oh, well, but I fancy her wrist will never be straight again.”

“That remains to be proved.... Next, the peasant who can read and write
is as a workman of more use and value to you.”

“No, you can ask anyone you like,” Konstantin Levin answered with
decision, “the man that can read and write is much inferior as a
workman. And mending the highroads is an impossibility; and as soon as
they put up bridges they’re stolen.”

“Still, that’s not the point,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, frowning. He
disliked contradiction, and still more, arguments that were continually
skipping from one thing to another, introducing new and disconnected
points, so that there was no knowing to which to reply. “Do you admit
that education is a benefit for the people?”

“Yes, I admit it,” said Levin without thinking, and he was conscious
immediately that he had said what he did not think. He felt that if he
admitted that, it would be proved that he had been talking meaningless
rubbish. How it would be proved he could not tell, but he knew that
this would inevitably be logically proved to him, and he awaited the
proofs.

The argument turned out to be far simpler than he had expected.

“If you admit that it is a benefit,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, “then, as
an honest man, you cannot help caring about it and sympathizing with
the movement, and so wishing to work for it.”

“But I still do not admit this movement to be just,” said Konstantin
Levin, reddening a little.

“What! But you said just now....”

“That’s to say, I don’t admit it’s being either good or possible.”

“That you can’t tell without making the trial.”

“Well, supposing that’s so,” said Levin, though he did not suppose so
at all, “supposing that is so, still I don’t see, all the same, what
I’m to worry myself about it for.”

“How so?”

“No; since we are talking, explain it to me from the philosophical
point of view,” said Levin.

“I can’t see where philosophy comes in,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, in a
tone, Levin fancied, as though he did not admit his brother’s right to
talk about philosophy. And that irritated Levin.

“I’ll tell you, then,” he said with heat, “I imagine the mainspring of
all our actions is, after all, self-interest. Now in the local
institutions I, as a nobleman, see nothing that could conduce to my
prosperity, and the roads are not better and could not be better; my
horses carry me well enough over bad ones. Doctors and dispensaries are
no use to me. An arbitrator of disputes is no use to me. I never appeal
to him, and never shall appeal to him. The schools are no good to me,
but positively harmful, as I told you. For me the district institutions
simply mean the liability to pay fourpence halfpenny for every three
acres, to drive into the town, sleep with bugs, and listen to all sorts
of idiocy and loathsomeness, and self-interest offers me no
inducement.”

“Excuse me,” Sergey Ivanovitch interposed with a smile, “self-interest
did not induce us to work for the emancipation of the serfs, but we did
work for it.”

“No!” Konstantin Levin broke in with still greater heat; “the
emancipation of the serfs was a different matter. There self-interest
did come in. One longed to throw off that yoke that crushed us, all
decent people among us. But to be a town councilor and discuss how many
dustmen are needed, and how chimneys shall be constructed in the town
in which I don’t live—to serve on a jury and try a peasant who’s stolen
a flitch of bacon, and listen for six hours at a stretch to all sorts
of jabber from the counsel for the defense and the prosecution, and the
president cross-examining my old half-witted Alioshka, ‘Do you admit,
prisoner in the dock, the fact of the removal of the bacon?’ ‘Eh?’”

Konstantin Levin had warmed to his subject, and began mimicking the
president and the half-witted Alioshka: it seemed to him that it was
all to the point.

But Sergey Ivanovitch shrugged his shoulders.

“Well, what do you mean to say, then?”

“I simply mean to say that those rights that touch me ... my interest,
I shall always defend to the best of my ability; that when they made
raids on us students, and the police read our letters, I was ready to
defend those rights to the utmost, to defend my rights to education and
freedom. I can understand compulsory military service, which affects my
children, my brothers, and myself, I am ready to deliberate on what
concerns me; but deliberating on how to spend forty thousand roubles of
district council money, or judging the half-witted Alioshka—I don’t
understand, and I can’t do it.”

Konstantin Levin spoke as though the floodgates of his speech had burst
open. Sergey Ivanovitch smiled.

“But tomorrow it’ll be your turn to be tried; would it have suited your
tastes better to be tried in the old criminal tribunal?”

“I’m not going to be tried. I shan’t murder anybody, and I’ve no need
of it. Well, I tell you what,” he went on, flying off again to a
subject quite beside the point, “our district self-government and all
the rest of it—it’s just like the birch branches we stick in the ground
on Trinity Day, for instance, to look like a copse which has grown up
of itself in Europe, and I can’t gush over these birch branches and
believe in them.”

Sergey Ivanovitch merely shrugged his shoulders, as though to express
his wonder how the birch branches had come into their argument at that
point, though he did really understand at once what his brother meant.

“Excuse me, but you know one really can’t argue in that way,” he
observed.

But Konstantin Levin wanted to justify himself for the failing, of
which he was conscious, of lack of zeal for the public welfare, and he
went on.

“I imagine,” he said, “that no sort of activity is likely to be lasting
if it is not founded on self-interest, that’s a universal principle, a
philosophical principle,” he said, repeating the word “philosophical”
with determination, as though wishing to show that he had as much right
as anyone else to talk of philosophy.

Sergey Ivanovitch smiled. “He too has a philosophy of his own at the
service of his natural tendencies,” he thought.

“Come, you’d better let philosophy alone,” he said. “The chief problem
of the philosophy of all ages consists just in finding the
indispensable connection which exists between individual and social
interests. But that’s not to the point; what is to the point is a
correction I must make in your comparison. The birches are not simply
stuck in, but some are sown and some are planted, and one must deal
carefully with them. It’s only those peoples that have an intuitive
sense of what’s of importance and significance in their institutions,
and know how to value them, that have a future before them—it’s only
those peoples that one can truly call historical.”

And Sergey Ivanovitch carried the subject into the regions of
philosophical history where Konstantin Levin could not follow him, and
showed him all the incorrectness of his view.

“As for your dislike of it, excuse my saying so, that’s simply our
Russian sloth and old serf-owner’s ways, and I’m convinced that in you
it’s a temporary error and will pass.”

Konstantin was silent. He felt himself vanquished on all sides, but he
felt at the same time that what he wanted to say was unintelligible to
his brother. Only he could not make up his mind whether it was
unintelligible because he was not capable of expressing his meaning
clearly, or because his brother would not or could not understand him.
But he did not pursue the speculation, and without replying, he fell to
musing on a quite different and personal matter.

Sergey Ivanovitch wound up the last line, untied the horse, and they
drove off.


Chapter 4

The personal matter that absorbed Levin during his conversation with
his brother was this. Once in a previous year he had gone to look at
the mowing, and being made very angry by the bailiff he had recourse to
his favorite means for regaining his temper,—he took a scythe from a
peasant and began mowing.

He liked the work so much that he had several times tried his hand at
mowing since. He had cut the whole of the meadow in front of his house,
and this year ever since the early spring he had cherished a plan for
mowing for whole days together with the peasants. Ever since his
brother’s arrival, he had been in doubt whether to mow or not. He was
loath to leave his brother alone all day long, and he was afraid his
brother would laugh at him about it. But as he drove into the meadow,
and recalled the sensations of mowing, he came near deciding that he
would go mowing. After the irritating discussion with his brother, he
pondered over this intention again.

“I must have physical exercise, or my temper’ll certainly be ruined,”
he thought, and he determined he would go mowing, however awkward he
might feel about it with his brother or the peasants.

Towards evening Konstantin Levin went to his counting house, gave
directions as to the work to be done, and sent about the village to
summon the mowers for the morrow, to cut the hay in Kalinov meadow, the
largest and best of his grass lands.

“And send my scythe, please, to Tit, for him to set it, and bring it
round tomorrow. I shall maybe do some mowing myself too,” he said,
trying not to be embarrassed.

The bailiff smiled and said: “Yes, sir.”

At tea the same evening Levin said to his brother:

“I fancy the fine weather will last. Tomorrow I shall start mowing.”

“I’m so fond of that form of field labor,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.

“I’m awfully fond of it. I sometimes mow myself with the peasants, and
tomorrow I want to try mowing the whole day.”

Sergey Ivanovitch lifted his head, and looked with interest at his
brother.

“How do you mean? Just like one of the peasants, all day long?”

“Yes, it’s very pleasant,” said Levin.

“It’s splendid as exercise, only you’ll hardly be able to stand it,”
said Sergey Ivanovitch, without a shade of irony.

“I’ve tried it. It’s hard work at first, but you get into it. I dare
say I shall manage to keep it up....”

“Really! what an idea! But tell me, how do the peasants look at it? I
suppose they laugh in their sleeves at their master’s being such a
queer fish?”

“No, I don’t think so; but it’s so delightful, and at the same time
such hard work, that one has no time to think about it.”

“But how will you do about dining with them? To send you a bottle of
Lafitte and roast turkey out there would be a little awkward.”

“No, I’ll simply come home at the time of their noonday rest.”

Next morning Konstantin Levin got up earlier than usual, but he was
detained giving directions on the farm, and when he reached the mowing
grass the mowers were already at their second row.

From the uplands he could get a view of the shaded cut part of the
meadow below, with its grayish ridges of cut grass, and the black heaps
of coats, taken off by the mowers at the place from which they had
started cutting.

Gradually, as he rode towards the meadow, the peasants came into sight,
some in coats, some in their shirts mowing, one behind another in a
long string, swinging their scythes differently. He counted forty-two
of them.

They were mowing slowly over the uneven, low-lying parts of the meadow,
where there had been an old dam. Levin recognized some of his own men.
Here was old Yermil in a very long white smock, bending forward to
swing a scythe; there was a young fellow, Vaska, who had been a
coachman of Levin’s, taking every row with a wide sweep. Here, too, was
Tit, Levin’s preceptor in the art of mowing, a thin little peasant. He
was in front of all, and cut his wide row without bending, as though
playing with the scythe.

Levin got off his mare, and fastening her up by the roadside went to
meet Tit, who took a second scythe out of a bush and gave it to him.

“It’s ready, sir; it’s like a razor, cuts of itself,” said Tit, taking
off his cap with a smile and giving him the scythe.

Levin took the scythe, and began trying it. As they finished their
rows, the mowers, hot and good-humored, came out into the road one
after another, and, laughing a little, greeted the master. They all
stared at him, but no one made any remark, till a tall old man, with a
wrinkled, beardless face, wearing a short sheepskin jacket, came out
into the road and accosted him.

“Look’ee now, master, once take hold of the rope there’s no letting it
go!” he said, and Levin heard smothered laughter among the mowers.

“I’ll try not to let it go,” he said, taking his stand behind Tit, and
waiting for the time to begin.

“Mind’ee,” repeated the old man.

Tit made room, and Levin started behind him. The grass was short close
to the road, and Levin, who had not done any mowing for a long while,
and was disconcerted by the eyes fastened upon him, cut badly for the
first moments, though he swung his scythe vigorously. Behind him he
heard voices:

“It’s not set right; handle’s too high; see how he has to stoop to it,”
said one.

“Press more on the heel,” said another.

“Never mind, he’ll get on all right,” the old man resumed.

“He’s made a start.... You swing it too wide, you’ll tire yourself
out.... The master, sure, does his best for himself! But see the grass
missed out! For such work us fellows would catch it!”

The grass became softer, and Levin, listening without answering,
followed Tit, trying to do the best he could. They moved a hundred
paces. Tit kept moving on, without stopping, not showing the slightest
weariness, but Levin was already beginning to be afraid he would not be
able to keep it up: he was so tired.

He felt as he swung his scythe that he was at the very end of his
strength, and was making up his mind to ask Tit to stop. But at that
very moment Tit stopped of his own accord, and stooping down picked up
some grass, rubbed his scythe, and began whetting it. Levin
straightened himself, and drawing a deep breath looked round. Behind
him came a peasant, and he too was evidently tired, for he stopped at
once without waiting to mow up to Levin, and began whetting his scythe.
Tit sharpened his scythe and Levin’s, and they went on. The next time
it was just the same. Tit moved on with sweep after sweep of his
scythe, not stopping nor showing signs of weariness. Levin followed
him, trying not to get left behind, and he found it harder and harder:
the moment came when he felt he had no strength left, but at that very
moment Tit stopped and whetted the scythes.

So they mowed the first row. And this long row seemed particularly hard
work to Levin; but when the end was reached and Tit, shouldering his
scythe, began with deliberate stride returning on the tracks left by
his heels in the cut grass, and Levin walked back in the same way over
the space he had cut, in spite of the sweat that ran in streams over
his face and fell in drops down his nose, and drenched his back as
though he had been soaked in water, he felt very happy. What delighted
him particularly was that now he knew he would be able to hold out.

His pleasure was only disturbed by his row not being well cut. “I will
swing less with my arm and more with my whole body,” he thought,
comparing Tit’s row, which looked as if it had been cut with a line,
with his own unevenly and irregularly lying grass.

The first row, as Levin noticed, Tit had mowed specially quickly,
probably wishing to put his master to the test, and the row happened to
be a long one. The next rows were easier, but still Levin had to strain
every nerve not to drop behind the peasants.

He thought of nothing, wished for nothing, but not to be left behind
the peasants, and to do his work as well as possible. He heard nothing
but the swish of scythes, and saw before him Tit’s upright figure
mowing away, the crescent-shaped curve of the cut grass, the grass and
flower heads slowly and rhythmically falling before the blade of his
scythe, and ahead of him the end of the row, where would come the rest.

Suddenly, in the midst of his toil, without understanding what it was
or whence it came, he felt a pleasant sensation of chill on his hot,
moist shoulders. He glanced at the sky in the interval for whetting the
scythes. A heavy, lowering storm cloud had blown up, and big raindrops
were falling. Some of the peasants went to their coats and put them on;
others—just like Levin himself—merely shrugged their shoulders,
enjoying the pleasant coolness of it.

Another row, and yet another row, followed—long rows and short rows,
with good grass and with poor grass. Levin lost all sense of time, and
could not have told whether it was late or early now. A change began to
come over his work, which gave him immense satisfaction. In the midst
of his toil there were moments during which he forgot what he was
doing, and it came all easy to him, and at those same moments his row
was almost as smooth and well cut as Tit’s. But so soon as he
recollected what he was doing, and began trying to do better, he was at
once conscious of all the difficulty of his task, and the row was badly
mown.

On finishing yet another row he would have gone back to the top of the
meadow again to begin the next, but Tit stopped, and going up to the
old man said something in a low voice to him. They both looked at the
sun. “What are they talking about, and why doesn’t he go back?” thought
Levin, not guessing that the peasants had been mowing no less than four
hours without stopping, and it was time for their lunch.

“Lunch, sir,” said the old man.

“Is it really time? That’s right; lunch, then.”

Levin gave his scythe to Tit, and together with the peasants, who were
crossing the long stretch of mown grass, slightly sprinkled with rain,
to get their bread from the heap of coats, he went towards his house.
Only then he suddenly awoke to the fact that he had been wrong about
the weather and the rain was drenching his hay.

“The hay will be spoiled,” he said.

“Not a bit of it, sir; mow in the rain, and you’ll rake in fine
weather!” said the old man.

Levin untied his horse and rode home to his coffee. Sergey Ivanovitch
was only just getting up. When he had drunk his coffee, Levin rode back
again to the mowing before Sergey Ivanovitch had had time to dress and
come down to the dining-room.


Chapter 5

After lunch Levin was not in the same place in the string of mowers as
before, but stood between the old man who had accosted him jocosely,
and now invited him to be his neighbor, and a young peasant, who had
only been married in the autumn, and who was mowing this summer for the
first time.

The old man, holding himself erect, moved in front, with his feet
turned out, taking long, regular strides, and with a precise and
regular action which seemed to cost him no more effort than swinging
one’s arms in walking, as though it were in play, he laid down the
high, even row of grass. It was as though it were not he but the sharp
scythe of itself swishing through the juicy grass.

Behind Levin came the lad Mishka. His pretty, boyish face, with a twist
of fresh grass bound round his hair, was all working with effort; but
whenever anyone looked at him he smiled. He would clearly have died
sooner than own it was hard work for him.

Levin kept between them. In the very heat of the day the mowing did not
seem such hard work to him. The perspiration with which he was drenched
cooled him, while the sun, that burned his back, his head, and his
arms, bare to the elbow, gave a vigor and dogged energy to his labor;
and more and more often now came those moments of unconsciousness, when
it was possible not to think what one was doing. The scythe cut of
itself. These were happy moments. Still more delightful were the
moments when they reached the stream where the rows ended, and the old
man rubbed his scythe with the wet, thick grass, rinsed its blade in
the fresh water of the stream, ladled out a little in a tin dipper, and
offered Levin a drink.

“What do you say to my home-brew, eh? Good, eh?” said he, winking.

And truly Levin had never drunk any liquor so good as this warm water
with green bits floating in it, and a taste of rust from the tin
dipper. And immediately after this came the delicious, slow saunter,
with his hand on the scythe, during which he could wipe away the
streaming sweat, take deep breaths of air, and look about at the long
string of mowers and at what was happening around in the forest and the
country.

The longer Levin mowed, the oftener he felt the moments of
unconsciousness in which it seemed not his hands that swung the scythe,
but the scythe mowing of itself, a body full of life and consciousness
of its own, and as though by magic, without thinking of it, the work
turned out regular and well-finished of itself. These were the most
blissful moments.

It was only hard work when he had to break off the motion, which had
become unconscious, and to think; when he had to mow round a hillock or
a tuft of sorrel. The old man did this easily. When a hillock came he
changed his action, and at one time with the heel, and at another with
the tip of his scythe, clipped the hillock round both sides with short
strokes. And while he did this he kept looking about and watching what
came into his view: at one moment he picked a wild berry and ate it or
offered it to Levin, then he flung away a twig with the blade of the
scythe, then he looked at a quail’s nest, from which the bird flew just
under the scythe, or caught a snake that crossed his path, and lifting
it on the scythe as though on a fork showed it to Levin and threw it
away.

For both Levin and the young peasant behind him, such changes of
position were difficult. Both of them, repeating over and over again
the same strained movement, were in a perfect frenzy of toil, and were
incapable of shifting their position and at the same time watching what
was before them.

Levin did not notice how time was passing. If he had been asked how
long he had been working he would have said half an hour—and it was
getting on for dinner time. As they were walking back over the cut
grass, the old man called Levin’s attention to the little girls and
boys who were coming from different directions, hardly visible through
the long grass, and along the road towards the mowers, carrying sacks
of bread dragging at their little hands and pitchers of the sour
rye-beer, with cloths wrapped round them.

“Look’ee, the little emmets crawling!” he said, pointing to them, and
he shaded his eyes with his hand to look at the sun. They mowed two
more rows; the old man stopped.

“Come, master, dinner time!” he said briskly. And on reaching the
stream the mowers moved off across the lines of cut grass towards their
pile of coats, where the children who had brought their dinners were
sitting waiting for them. The peasants gathered into groups—those
further away under a cart, those nearer under a willow bush.

Levin sat down by them; he felt disinclined to go away.

All constraint with the master had disappeared long ago. The peasants
got ready for dinner. Some washed, the young lads bathed in the stream,
others made a place comfortable for a rest, untied their sacks of
bread, and uncovered the pitchers of rye-beer. The old man crumbled up
some bread in a cup, stirred it with the handle of a spoon, poured
water on it from the dipper, broke up some more bread, and having
seasoned it with salt, he turned to the east to say his prayer.

“Come, master, taste my sop,” said he, kneeling down before the cup.

The sop was so good that Levin gave up the idea of going home. He dined
with the old man, and talked to him about his family affairs, taking
the keenest interest in them, and told him about his own affairs and
all the circumstances that could be of interest to the old man. He felt
much nearer to him than to his brother, and could not help smiling at
the affection he felt for this man. When the old man got up again, said
his prayer, and lay down under a bush, putting some grass under his
head for a pillow, Levin did the same, and in spite of the clinging
flies that were so persistent in the sunshine, and the midges that
tickled his hot face and body, he fell asleep at once and only waked
when the sun had passed to the other side of the bush and reached him.
The old man had been awake a long while, and was sitting up whetting
the scythes of the younger lads.

Levin looked about him and hardly recognized the place, everything was
so changed. The immense stretch of meadow had been mown and was
sparkling with a peculiar fresh brilliance, with its lines of already
sweet-smelling grass in the slanting rays of the evening sun. And the
bushes about the river had been cut down, and the river itself, not
visible before, now gleaming like steel in its bends, and the moving,
ascending, peasants, and the sharp wall of grass of the unmown part of
the meadow, and the hawks hovering over the stripped meadow—all was
perfectly new. Raising himself, Levin began considering how much had
been cut and how much more could still be done that day.

The work done was exceptionally much for forty-two men. They had cut
the whole of the big meadow, which had, in the years of serf labor,
taken thirty scythes two days to mow. Only the corners remained to do,
where the rows were short. But Levin felt a longing to get as much
mowing done that day as possible, and was vexed with the sun sinking so
quickly in the sky. He felt no weariness; all he wanted was to get his
work done more and more quickly and as much done as possible.

“Could you cut Mashkin Upland too?—what do you think?” he said to the
old man.

“As God wills, the sun’s not high. A little vodka for the lads?”

At the afternoon rest, when they were sitting down again, and those who
smoked had lighted their pipes, the old man told the men that “Mashkin
Upland’s to be cut—there’ll be some vodka.”

“Why not cut it? Come on, Tit! We’ll look sharp! We can eat at night.
Come on!” cried voices, and eating up their bread, the mowers went back
to work.

“Come, lads, keep it up!” said Tit, and ran on ahead almost at a trot.

“Get along, get along!” said the old man, hurrying after him and easily
overtaking him, “I’ll mow you down, look out!”

And young and old mowed away, as though they were racing with one
another. But however fast they worked, they did not spoil the grass,
and the rows were laid just as neatly and exactly. The little piece
left uncut in the corner was mown in five minutes. The last of the
mowers were just ending their rows while the foremost snatched up their
coats onto their shoulders, and crossed the road towards Mashkin
Upland.

The sun was already sinking into the trees when they went with their
jingling dippers into the wooded ravine of Mashkin Upland. The grass
was up to their waists in the middle of the hollow, soft, tender, and
feathery, spotted here and there among the trees with wild
heart’s-ease.

After a brief consultation—whether to take the rows lengthwise or
diagonally—Prohor Yermilin, also a renowned mower, a huge, black-haired
peasant, went on ahead. He went up to the top, turned back again and
started mowing, and they all proceeded to form in line behind him,
going downhill through the hollow and uphill right up to the edge of
the forest. The sun sank behind the forest. The dew was falling by now;
the mowers were in the sun only on the hillside, but below, where a
mist was rising, and on the opposite side, they mowed into the fresh,
dewy shade. The work went rapidly. The grass cut with a juicy sound,
and was at once laid in high, fragrant rows. The mowers from all sides,
brought closer together in the short row, kept urging one another on to
the sound of jingling dippers and clanging scythes, and the hiss of the
whetstones sharpening them, and good-humored shouts.

Levin still kept between the young peasant and the old man. The old
man, who had put on his short sheepskin jacket, was just as
good-humored, jocose, and free in his movements. Among the trees they
were continually cutting with their scythes the so-called “birch
mushrooms,” swollen fat in the succulent grass. But the old man bent
down every time he came across a mushroom, picked it up and put it in
his bosom. “Another present for my old woman,” he said as he did so.

Easy as it was to mow the wet, soft grass, it was hard work going up
and down the steep sides of the ravine. But this did not trouble the
old man. Swinging his scythe just as ever, and moving his feet in their
big, plaited shoes with firm, little steps, he climbed slowly up the
steep place, and though his breeches hanging out below his smock, and
his whole frame trembled with effort, he did not miss one blade of
grass or one mushroom on his way, and kept making jokes with the
peasants and Levin. Levin walked after him and often thought he must
fall, as he climbed with a scythe up a steep cliff where it would have
been hard work to clamber without anything. But he climbed up and did
what he had to do. He felt as though some external force were moving
him.


Chapter 6

Mashkin Upland was mown, the last row finished, the peasants had put on
their coats and were gaily trudging home. Levin got on his horse and,
parting regretfully from the peasants, rode homewards. On the hillside
he looked back; he could not see them in the mist that had risen from
the valley; he could only hear rough, good-humored voices, laughter,
and the sound of clanking scythes.

Sergey Ivanovitch had long ago finished dinner, and was drinking iced
lemon and water in his own room, looking through the reviews and papers
which he had only just received by post, when Levin rushed into the
room, talking merrily, with his wet and matted hair sticking to his
forehead, and his back and chest grimed and moist.

“We mowed the whole meadow! Oh, it is nice, delicious! And how have you
been getting on?” said Levin, completely forgetting the disagreeable
conversation of the previous day.

“Mercy! what do you look like!” said Sergey Ivanovitch, for the first
moment looking round with some dissatisfaction. “And the door, do shut
the door!” he cried. “You must have let in a dozen at least.”

Sergey Ivanovitch could not endure flies, and in his own room he never
opened the window except at night, and carefully kept the door shut.

“Not one, on my honor. But if I have, I’ll catch them. You wouldn’t
believe what a pleasure it is! How have you spent the day?”

“Very well. But have you really been mowing the whole day? I expect
you’re as hungry as a wolf. Kouzma has got everything ready for you.”

“No, I don’t feel hungry even. I had something to eat there. But I’ll
go and wash.”

“Yes, go along, go along, and I’ll come to you directly,” said Sergey
Ivanovitch, shaking his head as he looked at his brother. “Go along,
make haste,” he added smiling, and gathering up his books, he prepared
to go too. He, too, felt suddenly good-humored and disinclined to leave
his brother’s side. “But what did you do while it was raining?”

“Rain? Why, there was scarcely a drop. I’ll come directly. So you had a
nice day too? That’s first-rate.” And Levin went off to change his
clothes.

Five minutes later the brothers met in the dining-room. Although it
seemed to Levin that he was not hungry, and he sat down to dinner
simply so as not to hurt Kouzma’s feelings, yet when he began to eat
the dinner struck him as extraordinarily good. Sergey Ivanovitch
watched him with a smile.

“Oh, by the way, there’s a letter for you,” said he. “Kouzma, bring it
down, please. And mind you shut the doors.”

The letter was from Oblonsky. Levin read it aloud. Oblonsky wrote to
him from Petersburg: “I have had a letter from Dolly; she’s at
Ergushovo, and everything seems going wrong there. Do ride over and see
her, please; help her with advice; you know all about it. She will be
so glad to see you. She’s quite alone, poor thing. My mother-in-law and
all of them are still abroad.”

“That’s capital! I will certainly ride over to her,” said Levin. “Or
we’ll go together. She’s such a splendid woman, isn’t she?”

“They’re not far from here, then?”

“Twenty-five miles. Or perhaps it is thirty. But a capital road.
Capital, we’ll drive over.”

“I shall be delighted,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, still smiling. The
sight of his younger brother’s appearance had immediately put him in a
good humor.

“Well, you have an appetite!” he said, looking at his dark-red,
sunburnt face and neck bent over the plate.

“Splendid! You can’t imagine what an effectual remedy it is for every
sort of foolishness. I want to enrich medicine with a new word:
_Arbeitskur_.”

“Well, but you don’t need it, I should fancy.”

“No, but for all sorts of nervous invalids.”

“Yes, it ought to be tried. I had meant to come to the mowing to look
at you, but it was so unbearably hot that I got no further than the
forest. I sat there a little, and went on by the forest to the village,
met your old nurse, and sounded her as to the peasants’ view of you. As
far as I can make out, they don’t approve of this. She said: ‘It’s not
a gentleman’s work.’ Altogether, I fancy that in the people’s ideas
there are very clear and definite notions of certain, as they call it,
‘gentlemanly’ lines of action. And they don’t sanction the gentry’s
moving outside bounds clearly laid down in their ideas.”

“Maybe so; but anyway it’s a pleasure such as I have never known in my
life. And there’s no harm in it, you know. Is there?” answered Levin.
“I can’t help it if they don’t like it. Though I do believe it’s all
right. Eh?”

“Altogether,” pursued Sergey Ivanovitch, “you’re satisfied with your
day?”

“Quite satisfied. We cut the whole meadow. And such a splendid old man
I made friends with there! You can’t fancy how delightful he was!”

“Well, so you’re content with your day. And so am I. First, I solved
two chess problems, and one a very pretty one—a pawn opening. I’ll show
it you. And then—I thought over our conversation yesterday.”

“Eh! our conversation yesterday?” said Levin, blissfully dropping his
eyelids and drawing deep breaths after finishing his dinner, and
absolutely incapable of recalling what their conversation yesterday was
about.

“I think you are partly right. Our difference of opinion amounts to
this, that you make the mainspring self-interest, while I suppose that
interest in the common weal is bound to exist in every man of a certain
degree of advancement. Possibly you are right too, that action founded
on material interest would be more desirable. You are altogether, as
the French say, too _primesautière_ a nature; you must have intense,
energetic action, or nothing.”

Levin listened to his brother and did not understand a single word, and
did not want to understand. He was only afraid his brother might ask
him some question which would make it evident he had not heard.

“So that’s what I think it is, my dear boy,” said Sergey Ivanovitch,
touching him on the shoulder.

“Yes, of course. But, do you know? I won’t stand up for my view,”
answered Levin, with a guilty, childlike smile. “Whatever was it I was
disputing about?” he wondered. “Of course, I’m right, and he’s right,
and it’s all first-rate. Only I must go round to the counting house and
see to things.” He got up, stretching and smiling. Sergey Ivanovitch
smiled too.

“If you want to go out, let’s go together,” he said, disinclined to be
parted from his brother, who seemed positively breathing out freshness
and energy. “Come, we’ll go to the counting house, if you have to go
there.”

“Oh, heavens!” shouted Levin, so loudly that Sergey Ivanovitch was
quite frightened.

“What, what is the matter?”

“How’s Agafea Mihalovna’s hand?” said Levin, slapping himself on the
head. “I’d positively forgotten her even.”

“It’s much better.”

“Well, anyway I’ll run down to her. Before you’ve time to get your hat
on, I’ll be back.”

And he ran downstairs, clattering with his heels like a spring-rattle.


Chapter 7

Stephan Arkadyevitch had gone to Petersburg to perform the most natural
and essential official duty—so familiar to everyone in the government
service, though incomprehensible to outsiders—that duty, but for which
one could hardly be in government service, of reminding the ministry of
his existence—and having, for the due performance of this rite, taken
all the available cash from home, was gaily and agreeably spending his
days at the races and in the summer villas. Meanwhile Dolly and the
children had moved into the country, to cut down expenses as much as
possible. She had gone to Ergushovo, the estate that had been her
dowry, and the one where in spring the forest had been sold. It was
nearly forty miles from Levin’s Pokrovskoe. The big, old house at
Ergushovo had been pulled down long ago, and the old prince had had the
lodge done up and built on to. Twenty years before, when Dolly was a
child, the lodge had been roomy and comfortable, though, like all
lodges, it stood sideways to the entrance avenue, and faced the south.
But by now this lodge was old and dilapidated. When Stepan Arkadyevitch
had gone down in the spring to sell the forest, Dolly had begged him to
look over the house and order what repairs might be needed. Stepan
Arkadyevitch, like all unfaithful husbands indeed, was very solicitous
for his wife’s comfort, and he had himself looked over the house, and
given instructions about everything that he considered necessary. What
he considered necessary was to cover all the furniture with cretonne,
to put up curtains, to weed the garden, to make a little bridge on the
pond, and to plant flowers. But he forgot many other essential matters,
the want of which greatly distressed Darya Alexandrovna later on.

In spite of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s efforts to be an attentive father and
husband, he never could keep in his mind that he had a wife and
children. He had bachelor tastes, and it was in accordance with them
that he shaped his life. On his return to Moscow he informed his wife
with pride that everything was ready, that the house would be a little
paradise, and that he advised her most certainly to go. His wife’s
staying away in the country was very agreeable to Stepan Arkadyevitch
from every point of view: it did the children good, it decreased
expenses, and it left him more at liberty. Darya Alexandrovna regarded
staying in the country for the summer as essential for the children,
especially for the little girl, who had not succeeded in regaining her
strength after the scarlatina, and also as a means of escaping the
petty humiliations, the little bills owing to the wood-merchant, the
fishmonger, the shoemaker, which made her miserable. Besides this, she
was pleased to go away to the country because she was dreaming of
getting her sister Kitty to stay with her there. Kitty was to be back
from abroad in the middle of the summer, and bathing had been
prescribed for her. Kitty wrote that no prospect was so alluring as to
spend the summer with Dolly at Ergushovo, full of childish associations
for both of them.

The first days of her existence in the country were very hard for
Dolly. She used to stay in the country as a child, and the impression
she had retained of it was that the country was a refuge from all the
unpleasantness of the town, that life there, though not luxurious—Dolly
could easily make up her mind to that—was cheap and comfortable; that
there was plenty of everything, everything was cheap, everything could
be got, and children were happy. But now coming to the country as the
head of a family, she perceived that it was all utterly unlike what she
had fancied.

The day after their arrival there was a heavy fall of rain, and in the
night the water came through in the corridor and in the nursery, so
that the beds had to be carried into the drawing-room. There was no
kitchen maid to be found; of the nine cows, it appeared from the words
of the cowherd-woman that some were about to calve, others had just
calved, others were old, and others again hard-uddered; there was not
butter nor milk enough even for the children. There were no eggs. They
could get no fowls; old, purplish, stringy cocks were all they had for
roasting and boiling. Impossible to get women to scrub the floors—all
were potato-hoeing. Driving was out of the question, because one of the
horses was restive, and bolted in the shafts. There was no place where
they could bathe; the whole of the river-bank was trampled by the
cattle and open to the road; even walks were impossible, for the cattle
strayed into the garden through a gap in the hedge, and there was one
terrible bull, who bellowed, and therefore might be expected to gore
somebody. There were no proper cupboards for their clothes; what
cupboards there were either would not close at all, or burst open
whenever anyone passed by them. There were no pots and pans; there was
no copper in the washhouse, nor even an ironing-board in the maids’
room.

Finding instead of peace and rest all these, from her point of view,
fearful calamities, Darya Alexandrovna was at first in despair. She
exerted herself to the utmost, felt the hopelessness of the position,
and was every instant suppressing the tears that started into her eyes.
The bailiff, a retired quartermaster, whom Stepan Arkadyevitch had
taken a fancy to and had appointed bailiff on account of his handsome
and respectful appearance as a hall-porter, showed no sympathy for
Darya Alexandrovna’s woes. He said respectfully, “nothing can be done,
the peasants are such a wretched lot,” and did nothing to help her.

The position seemed hopeless. But in the Oblonskys’ household, as in
all families indeed, there was one inconspicuous but most valuable and
useful person, Marya Philimonovna. She soothed her mistress, assured
her that everything would _come round_ (it was her expression, and
Matvey had borrowed it from her), and without fuss or hurry proceeded
to set to work herself. She had immediately made friends with the
bailiff’s wife, and on the very first day she drank tea with her and
the bailiff under the acacias, and reviewed all the circumstances of
the position. Very soon Marya Philimonovna had established her club, so
to say, under the acacias, and there it was, in this club, consisting
of the bailiff’s wife, the village elder, and the counting-house clerk,
that the difficulties of existence were gradually smoothed away, and in
a week’s time everything actually had come round. The roof was mended,
a kitchen maid was found—a crony of the village elder’s—hens were
bought, the cows began giving milk, the garden hedge was stopped up
with stakes, the carpenter made a mangle, hooks were put in the
cupboards, and they ceased to burst open spontaneously, and an
ironing-board covered with army cloth was placed across from the arm of
a chair to the chest of drawers, and there was a smell of flatirons in
the maids’ room.

“Just see, now, and you were quite in despair,” said Marya
Philimonovna, pointing to the ironing-board. They even rigged up a
bathing-shed of straw hurdles. Lily began to bathe, and Darya
Alexandrovna began to realize, if only in part, her expectations, if
not of a peaceful, at least of a comfortable, life in the country.
Peaceful with six children Darya Alexandrovna could not be. One would
fall ill, another might easily become so, a third would be without
something necessary, a fourth would show symptoms of a bad disposition,
and so on. Rare indeed were the brief periods of peace. But these cares
and anxieties were for Darya Alexandrovna the sole happiness possible.
Had it not been for them, she would have been left alone to brood over
her husband who did not love her. And besides, hard though it was for
the mother to bear the dread of illness, the illnesses themselves, and
the grief of seeing signs of evil propensities in her children—the
children themselves were even now repaying her in small joys for her
sufferings. Those joys were so small that they passed unnoticed, like
gold in sand, and at bad moments she could see nothing but the pain,
nothing but sand; but there were good moments too when she saw nothing
but the joy, nothing but gold.

Now in the solitude of the country, she began to be more and more
frequently aware of those joys. Often, looking at them, she would make
every possible effort to persuade herself that she was mistaken, that
she as a mother was partial to her children. All the same, she could
not help saying to herself that she had charming children, all six of
them in different ways, but a set of children such as is not often to
be met with, and she was happy in them, and proud of them.


Chapter 8

Towards the end of May, when everything had been more or less
satisfactorily arranged, she received her husband’s answer to her
complaints of the disorganized state of things in the country. He wrote
begging her forgiveness for not having thought of everything before,
and promised to come down at the first chance. This chance did not
present itself, and till the beginning of June Darya Alexandrovna
stayed alone in the country.

On the Sunday in St. Peter’s week Darya Alexandrovna drove to mass for
all her children to take the sacrament. Darya Alexandrovna in her
intimate, philosophical talks with her sister, her mother, and her
friends very often astonished them by the freedom of her views in
regard to religion. She had a strange religion of transmigration of
souls all her own, in which she had firm faith, troubling herself
little about the dogmas of the Church. But in her family she was strict
in carrying out all that was required by the Church—and not merely in
order to set an example, but with all her heart in it. The fact that
the children had not been at the sacrament for nearly a year worried
her extremely, and with the full approval and sympathy of Marya
Philimonovna she decided that this should take place now in the summer.

For several days before, Darya Alexandrovna was busily deliberating on
how to dress all the children. Frocks were made or altered and washed,
seams and flounces were let out, buttons were sewn on, and ribbons got
ready. One dress, Tanya’s, which the English governess had undertaken,
cost Darya Alexandrovna much loss of temper. The English governess in
altering it had made the seams in the wrong place, had taken up the
sleeves too much, and altogether spoilt the dress. It was so narrow on
Tanya’s shoulders that it was quite painful to look at her. But Marya
Philimonovna had the happy thought of putting in gussets, and adding a
little shoulder-cape. The dress was set right, but there was nearly a
quarrel with the English governess. On the morning, however, all was
happily arranged, and towards ten o’clock—the time at which they had
asked the priest to wait for them for the mass—the children in their
new dresses, with beaming faces, stood on the step before the carriage
waiting for their mother.

To the carriage, instead of the restive Raven, they had harnessed,
thanks to the representations of Marya Philimonovna, the bailiff’s
horse, Brownie, and Darya Alexandrovna, delayed by anxiety over her own
attire, came out and got in, dressed in a white muslin gown.

Darya Alexandrovna had done her hair, and dressed with care and
excitement. In the old days she had dressed for her own sake to look
pretty and be admired. Later on, as she got older, dress became more
and more distasteful to her. She saw that she was losing her good
looks. But now she began to feel pleasure and interest in dress again.
Now she did not dress for her own sake, not for the sake of her own
beauty, but simply that as the mother of those exquisite creatures she
might not spoil the general effect. And looking at herself for the last
time in the looking-glass she was satisfied with herself. She looked
nice. Not nice as she would have wished to look nice in old days at a
ball, but nice for the object which she now had in view.

In the church there was no one but the peasants, the servants and their
women-folk. But Darya Alexandrovna saw, or fancied she saw, the
sensation produced by her children and her. The children were not only
beautiful to look at in their smart little dresses, but they were
charming in the way they behaved. Aliosha, it is true, did not stand
quite correctly; he kept turning round, trying to look at his little
jacket from behind; but all the same he was wonderfully sweet. Tanya
behaved like a grown-up person, and looked after the little ones. And
the smallest, Lily, was bewitching in her naïve astonishment at
everything, and it was difficult not to smile when, after taking the
sacrament, she said in English, “Please, some more.”

On the way home the children felt that something solemn had happened,
and were very sedate.

Everything went happily at home too; but at lunch Grisha began
whistling, and, what was worse, was disobedient to the English
governess, and was forbidden to have any tart. Darya Alexandrovna would
not have let things go so far on such a day had she been present; but
she had to support the English governess’s authority, and she upheld
her decision that Grisha should have no tart. This rather spoiled the
general good humor. Grisha cried, declaring that Nikolinka had whistled
too, and he was not punished, and that he wasn’t crying for the tart—he
didn’t care—but at being unjustly treated. This was really too tragic,
and Darya Alexandrovna made up her mind to persuade the English
governess to forgive Grisha, and she went to speak to her. But on the
way, as she passed the drawing-room, she beheld a scene, filling her
heart with such pleasure that the tears came into her eyes, and she
forgave the delinquent herself.

The culprit was sitting at the window in the corner of the
drawing-room; beside him was standing Tanya with a plate. On the
pretext of wanting to give some dinner to her dolls, she had asked the
governess’s permission to take her share of tart to the nursery, and
had taken it instead to her brother. While still weeping over the
injustice of his punishment, he was eating the tart, and kept saying
through his sobs, “Eat yourself; let’s eat it together ... together.”

Tanya had at first been under the influence of her pity for Grisha,
then of a sense of her noble action, and tears were standing in her
eyes too; but she did not refuse, and ate her share.

On catching sight of their mother they were dismayed, but, looking into
her face, they saw they were not doing wrong. They burst out laughing,
and, with their mouths full of tart, they began wiping their smiling
lips with their hands, and smearing their radiant faces all over with
tears and jam.

“Mercy! Your new white frock! Tanya! Grisha!” said their mother, trying
to save the frock, but with tears in her eyes, smiling a blissful,
rapturous smile.

The new frocks were taken off, and orders were given for the little
girls to have their blouses put on, and the boys their old jackets, and
the wagonette to be harnessed; with Brownie, to the bailiff’s
annoyance, again in the shafts, to drive out for mushroom picking and
bathing. A roar of delighted shrieks arose in the nursery, and never
ceased till they had set off for the bathing-place.

They gathered a whole basketful of mushrooms; even Lily found a birch
mushroom. It had always happened before that Miss Hoole found them and
pointed them out to her; but this time she found a big one quite of
herself, and there was a general scream of delight, “Lily has found a
mushroom!”

Then they reached the river, put the horses under the birch trees, and
went to the bathing-place. The coachman, Terenty, fastened the horses,
who kept whisking away the flies, to a tree, and, treading down the
grass, lay down in the shade of a birch and smoked his shag, while the
never-ceasing shrieks of delight of the children floated across to him
from the bathing-place.

Though it was hard work to look after all the children and restrain
their wild pranks, though it was difficult too to keep in one’s head
and not mix up all the stockings, little breeches, and shoes for the
different legs, and to undo and to do up again all the tapes and
buttons, Darya Alexandrovna, who had always liked bathing herself, and
believed it to be very good for the children, enjoyed nothing so much
as bathing with all the children. To go over all those fat little legs,
pulling on their stockings, to take in her arms and dip those little
naked bodies, and to hear their screams of delight and alarm, to see
the breathless faces with wide-open, scared, and happy eyes of all her
splashing cherubs, was a great pleasure to her.

When half the children had been dressed, some peasant women in holiday
dress, out picking herbs, came up to the bathing-shed and stopped
shyly. Marya Philimonovna called one of them and handed her a sheet and
a shirt that had dropped into the water for her to dry them, and Darya
Alexandrovna began to talk to the women. At first they laughed behind
their hands and did not understand her questions, but soon they grew
bolder and began to talk, winning Darya Alexandrovna’s heart at once by
the genuine admiration of the children that they showed.

“My, what a beauty! as white as sugar,” said one, admiring Tanitchka,
and shaking her head; “but thin....”

“Yes, she has been ill.”

“And so they’ve been bathing you too,” said another to the baby.

“No; he’s only three months old,” answered Darya Alexandrovna with
pride.

“You don’t say so!”

“And have you any children?”

“I’ve had four; I’ve two living—a boy and a girl. I weaned her last
carnival.”

“How old is she?”

“Why, two years old.”

“Why did you nurse her so long?”

“It’s our custom; for three fasts....”

And the conversation became most interesting to Darya Alexandrovna.
What sort of time did she have? What was the matter with the boy? Where
was her husband? Did it often happen?

Darya Alexandrovna felt disinclined to leave the peasant women, so
interesting to her was their conversation, so completely identical were
all their interests. What pleased her most of all was that she saw
clearly what all the women admired more than anything was her having so
many children, and such fine ones. The peasant women even made Darya
Alexandrovna laugh, and offended the English governess, because she was
the cause of the laughter she did not understand. One of the younger
women kept staring at the Englishwoman, who was dressing after all the
rest, and when she put on her third petticoat she could not refrain
from the remark, “My, she keeps putting on and putting on, and she’ll
never have done!” she said, and they all went off into roars.


Chapter 9

On the drive home, as Darya Alexandrovna, with all her children round
her, their heads still wet from their bath, and a kerchief tied over
her own head, was getting near the house, the coachman said, “There’s
some gentleman coming: the master of Pokrovskoe, I do believe.”

Darya Alexandrovna peeped out in front, and was delighted when she
recognized in the gray hat and gray coat the familiar figure of Levin
walking to meet them. She was glad to see him at any time, but at this
moment she was specially glad he should see her in all her glory. No
one was better able to appreciate her grandeur than Levin.

Seeing her, he found himself face to face with one of the pictures of
his daydream of family life.

“You’re like a hen with your chickens, Darya Alexandrovna.”

“Ah, how glad I am to see you!” she said, holding out her hand to him.

“Glad to see me, but you didn’t let me know. My brother’s staying with
me. I got a note from Stiva that you were here.”

“From Stiva?” Darya Alexandrovna asked with surprise.

“Yes; he writes that you are here, and that he thinks you might allow
me to be of use to you,” said Levin, and as he said it he became
suddenly embarrassed, and, stopping abruptly, he walked on in silence
by the wagonette, snapping off the buds of the lime trees and nibbling
them. He was embarrassed through a sense that Darya Alexandrovna would
be annoyed by receiving from an outsider help that should by rights
have come from her own husband. Darya Alexandrovna certainly did not
like this little way of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s of foisting his domestic
duties on others. And she was at once aware that Levin was aware of
this. It was just for this fineness of perception, for this delicacy,
that Darya Alexandrovna liked Levin.

“I know, of course,” said Levin, “that that simply means that you would
like to see me, and I’m exceedingly glad. Though I can fancy that, used
to town housekeeping as you are, you must feel in the wilds here, and
if there’s anything wanted, I’m altogether at your disposal.”

“Oh, no!” said Dolly. “At first things were rather uncomfortable, but
now we’ve settled everything capitally—thanks to my old nurse,” she
said, indicating Marya Philimonovna, who, seeing that they were
speaking of her, smiled brightly and cordially to Levin. She knew him,
and knew that he would be a good match for her young lady, and was very
keen to see the matter settled.

“Won’t you get in, sir, we’ll make room this side!” she said to him.

“No, I’ll walk. Children, who’d like to race the horses with me?” The
children knew Levin very little, and could not remember when they had
seen him, but they experienced in regard to him none of that strange
feeling of shyness and hostility which children so often experience
towards hypocritical, grown-up people, and for which they are so often
and miserably punished. Hypocrisy in anything whatever may deceive the
cleverest and most penetrating man, but the least wide-awake of
children recognizes it, and is revolted by it, however ingeniously it
may be disguised. Whatever faults Levin had, there was not a trace of
hypocrisy in him, and so the children showed him the same friendliness
that they saw in their mother’s face. On his invitation, the two elder
ones at once jumped out to him and ran with him as simply as they would
have done with their nurse or Miss Hoole or their mother. Lily, too,
began begging to go to him, and her mother handed her to him; he sat
her on his shoulder and ran along with her.

“Don’t be afraid, don’t be afraid, Darya Alexandrovna!” he said,
smiling good-humoredly to the mother; “there’s no chance of my hurting
or dropping her.”

And, looking at his strong, agile, assiduously careful and needlessly
wary movements, the mother felt her mind at rest, and smiled gaily and
approvingly as she watched him.

Here, in the country, with children, and with Darya Alexandrovna, with
whom he was in sympathy, Levin was in a mood not infrequent with him,
of childlike light-heartedness that she particularly liked in him. As
he ran with the children, he taught them gymnastic feats, set Miss
Hoole laughing with his queer English accent, and talked to Darya
Alexandrovna of his pursuits in the country.

After dinner, Darya Alexandrovna, sitting alone with him on the
balcony, began to speak of Kitty.

“You know, Kitty’s coming here, and is going to spend the summer with
me.”

“Really,” he said, flushing, and at once, to change the conversation,
he said: “Then I’ll send you two cows, shall I? If you insist on a bill
you shall pay me five roubles a month; but it’s really too bad of you.”

“No, thank you. We can manage very well now.”

“Oh, well, then, I’ll have a look at your cows, and if you’ll allow me,
I’ll give directions about their food. Everything depends on their
food.”

And Levin, to turn the conversation, explained to Darya Alexandrovna
the theory of cow-keeping, based on the principle that the cow is
simply a machine for the transformation of food into milk, and so on.

He talked of this, and passionately longed to hear more of Kitty, and,
at the same time, was afraid of hearing it. He dreaded the breaking up
of the inward peace he had gained with such effort.

“Yes, but still all this has to be looked after, and who is there to
look after it?” Darya Alexandrovna responded, without interest.

She had by now got her household matters so satisfactorily arranged,
thanks to Marya Philimonovna, that she was disinclined to make any
change in them; besides, she had no faith in Levin’s knowledge of
farming. General principles, as to the cow being a machine for the
production of milk, she looked on with suspicion. It seemed to her that
such principles could only be a hindrance in farm management. It all
seemed to her a far simpler matter: all that was needed, as Marya
Philimonovna had explained, was to give Brindle and Whitebreast more
food and drink, and not to let the cook carry all the kitchen slops to
the laundry maid’s cow. That was clear. But general propositions as to
feeding on meal and on grass were doubtful and obscure. And, what was
most important, she wanted to talk about Kitty.


Chapter 10

“Kitty writes to me that there’s nothing she longs for so much as quiet
and solitude,” Dolly said after the silence that had followed.

“And how is she—better?” Levin asked in agitation.

“Thank God, she’s quite well again. I never believed her lungs were
affected.”

“Oh, I’m very glad!” said Levin, and Dolly fancied she saw something
touching, helpless, in his face as he said this and looked silently
into her face.

“Let me ask you, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” said Darya Alexandrovna,
smiling her kindly and rather mocking smile, “why is it you are angry
with Kitty?”

“I? I’m not angry with her,” said Levin.

“Yes, you are angry. Why was it you did not come to see us nor them
when you were in Moscow?”

“Darya Alexandrovna,” he said, blushing up to the roots of his hair, “I
wonder really that with your kind heart you don’t feel this. How it is
you feel no pity for me, if nothing else, when you know....”

“What do I know?”

“You know I made an offer and that I was refused,” said Levin, and all
the tenderness he had been feeling for Kitty a minute before was
replaced by a feeling of anger for the slight he had suffered.

“What makes you suppose I know?”

“Because everybody knows it....”

“That’s just where you are mistaken; I did not know it, though I had
guessed it was so.”

“Well, now you know it.”

“All I knew was that something had happened that made her dreadfully
miserable, and that she begged me never to speak of it. And if she
would not tell me, she would certainly not speak of it to anyone else.
But what did pass between you? Tell me.”

“I have told you.”

“When was it?”

“When I was at their house the last time.”

“Do you know that,” said Darya Alexandrovna, “I am awfully, awfully
sorry for her. You suffer only from pride....”

“Perhaps so,” said Levin, “but....”

She interrupted him.

“But she, poor girl ... I am awfully, awfully sorry for her. Now I see
it all.”

“Well, Darya Alexandrovna, you must excuse me,” he said, getting up.
“Good-bye, Darya Alexandrovna, till we meet again.”

“No, wait a minute,” she said, clutching him by the sleeve. “Wait a
minute, sit down.”

“Please, please, don’t let us talk of this,” he said, sitting down, and
at the same time feeling rise up and stir within his heart a hope he
had believed to be buried.

“If I did not like you,” she said, and tears came into her eyes; “if I
did not know you, as I do know you....”

The feeling that had seemed dead revived more and more, rose up and
took possession of Levin’s heart.

“Yes, I understand it all now,” said Darya Alexandrovna. “You can’t
understand it; for you men, who are free and make your own choice, it’s
always clear whom you love. But a girl’s in a position of suspense,
with all a woman’s or maiden’s modesty, a girl who sees you men from
afar, who takes everything on trust,—a girl may have, and often has,
such a feeling that she cannot tell what to say.”

“Yes, if the heart does not speak....”

“No, the heart does speak; but just consider: you men have views about
a girl, you come to the house, you make friends, you criticize, you
wait to see if you have found what you love, and then, when you are
sure you love her, you make an offer....”

“Well, that’s not quite it.”

“Anyway you make an offer, when your love is ripe or when the balance
has completely turned between the two you are choosing from. But a girl
is not asked. She is expected to make her choice, and yet she cannot
choose, she can only answer ‘yes’ or ‘no.’”

“Yes, to choose between me and Vronsky,” thought Levin, and the dead
thing that had come to life within him died again, and only weighed on
his heart and set it aching.

“Darya Alexandrovna,” he said, “that’s how one chooses a new dress or
some purchase or other, not love. The choice has been made, and so much
the better.... And there can be no repeating it.”

“Ah, pride, pride!” said Darya Alexandrovna, as though despising him
for the baseness of this feeling in comparison with that other feeling
which only women know. “At the time when you made Kitty an offer she
was just in a position in which she could not answer. She was in doubt.
Doubt between you and Vronsky. Him she was seeing every day, and you
she had not seen for a long while. Supposing she had been older ... I,
for instance, in her place could have felt no doubt. I always disliked
him, and so it has turned out.”

Levin recalled Kitty’s answer. She had said: “_No, that cannot be_....”

“Darya Alexandrovna,” he said dryly, “I appreciate your confidence in
me; I believe you are making a mistake. But whether I am right or
wrong, that pride you so despise makes any thought of Katerina
Alexandrovna out of the question for me,—you understand, utterly out of
the question.”

“I will only say one thing more: you know that I am speaking of my
sister, whom I love as I love my own children. I don’t say she cared
for you, all I meant to say is that her refusal at that moment proves
nothing.”

“I don’t know!” said Levin, jumping up. “If you only knew how you are
hurting me. It’s just as if a child of yours were dead, and they were
to say to you: He would have been like this and like that, and he might
have lived, and how happy you would have been in him. But he’s dead,
dead, dead!...”

“How absurd you are!” said Darya Alexandrovna, looking with mournful
tenderness at Levin’s excitement. “Yes, I see it all more and more
clearly,” she went on musingly. “So you won’t come to see us, then,
when Kitty’s here?”

“No, I shan’t come. Of course I won’t avoid meeting Katerina
Alexandrovna, but as far as I can, I will try to save her the annoyance
of my presence.”

“You are very, very absurd,” repeated Darya Alexandrovna, looking with
tenderness into his face. “Very well then, let it be as though we had
not spoken of this. What have you come for, Tanya?” she said in French
to the little girl who had come in.

“Where’s my spade, mamma?”

“I speak French, and you must too.”

The little girl tried to say it in French, but could not remember the
French for spade; the mother prompted her, and then told her in French
where to look for the spade. And this made a disagreeable impression on
Levin.

Everything in Darya Alexandrovna’s house and children struck him now as
by no means so charming as a little while before. “And what does she
talk French with the children for?” he thought; “how unnatural and
false it is! And the children feel it so: Learning French and
unlearning sincerity,” he thought to himself, unaware that Darya
Alexandrovna had thought all that over twenty times already, and yet,
even at the cost of some loss of sincerity, believed it necessary to
teach her children French in that way.

“But why are you going? Do stay a little.”

Levin stayed to tea; but his good-humor had vanished, and he felt ill
at ease.

After tea he went out into the hall to order his horses to be put in,
and, when he came back, he found Darya Alexandrovna greatly disturbed,
with a troubled face, and tears in her eyes. While Levin had been
outside, an incident had occurred which had utterly shattered all the
happiness she had been feeling that day, and her pride in her children.
Grisha and Tanya had been fighting over a ball. Darya Alexandrovna,
hearing a scream in the nursery, ran in and saw a terrible sight. Tanya
was pulling Grisha’s hair, while he, with a face hideous with rage, was
beating her with his fists wherever he could get at her. Something
snapped in Darya Alexandrovna’s heart when she saw this. It was as if
darkness had swooped down upon her life; she felt that these children
of hers, that she was so proud of, were not merely most ordinary, but
positively bad, ill-bred children, with coarse, brutal
propensities—wicked children.

She could not talk or think of anything else, and she could not speak
to Levin of her misery.

Levin saw she was unhappy and tried to comfort her, saying that it
showed nothing bad, that all children fight; but, even as he said it,
he was thinking in his heart: “No, I won’t be artificial and talk
French with my children; but my children won’t be like that. All one
has to do is not spoil children, not to distort their nature, and
they’ll be delightful. No, my children won’t be like that.”

He said good-bye and drove away, and she did not try to keep him.


Chapter 11

In the middle of July the elder of the village on Levin’s sister’s
estate, about fifteen miles from Pokrovskoe, came to Levin to report on
how things were going there and on the hay. The chief source of income
on his sister’s estate was from the riverside meadows. In former years
the hay had been bought by the peasants for twenty roubles the three
acres. When Levin took over the management of the estate, he thought on
examining the grasslands that they were worth more, and he fixed the
price at twenty-five roubles the three acres. The peasants would not
give that price, and, as Levin suspected, kept off other purchasers.
Then Levin had driven over himself, and arranged to have the grass cut,
partly by hired labor, partly at a payment of a certain proportion of
the crop. His own peasants put every hindrance they could in the way of
this new arrangement, but it was carried out, and the first year the
meadows had yielded a profit almost double. The previous year—which was
the third year—the peasants had maintained the same opposition to the
arrangement, and the hay had been cut on the same system. This year the
peasants were doing all the mowing for a third of the hay crop, and the
village elder had come now to announce that the hay had been cut, and
that, fearing rain, they had invited the counting-house clerk over, had
divided the crop in his presence, and had raked together eleven stacks
as the owner’s share. From the vague answers to his question how much
hay had been cut on the principal meadow, from the hurry of the village
elder who had made the division, not asking leave, from the whole tone
of the peasant, Levin perceived that there was something wrong in the
division of the hay, and made up his mind to drive over himself to look
into the matter.

Arriving for dinner at the village, and leaving his horse at the
cottage of an old friend of his, the husband of his brother’s
wet-nurse, Levin went to see the old man in his bee-house, wanting to
find out from him the truth about the hay. Parmenitch, a talkative,
comely old man, gave Levin a very warm welcome, showed him all he was
doing, told him everything about his bees and the swarms of that year;
but gave vague and unwilling answers to Levin’s inquiries about the
mowing. This confirmed Levin still more in his suspicions. He went to
the hay fields and examined the stacks. The haystacks could not
possibly contain fifty wagon-loads each, and to convict the peasants
Levin ordered the wagons that had carried the hay to be brought up
directly, to lift one stack, and carry it into the barn. There turned
out to be only thirty-two loads in the stack. In spite of the village
elder’s assertions about the compressibility of hay, and its having
settled down in the stacks, and his swearing that everything had been
done in the fear of God, Levin stuck to his point that the hay had been
divided without his orders, and that, therefore, he would not accept
that hay as fifty loads to a stack. After a prolonged dispute the
matter was decided by the peasants taking these eleven stacks,
reckoning them as fifty loads each. The arguments and the division of
the haycocks lasted the whole afternoon. When the last of the hay had
been divided, Levin, intrusting the superintendence of the rest to the
counting-house clerk, sat down on a haycock marked off by a stake of
willow, and looked admiringly at the meadow swarming with peasants.

In front of him, in the bend of the river beyond the marsh, moved a
bright-colored line of peasant women, and the scattered hay was being
rapidly formed into gray winding rows over the pale green stubble.
After the women came the men with pitchforks, and from the gray rows
there were growing up broad, high, soft haycocks. To the left, carts
were rumbling over the meadow that had been already cleared, and one
after another the haycocks vanished, flung up in huge forkfuls, and in
their place there were rising heavy cartloads of fragrant hay hanging
over the horses’ hind-quarters.

“What weather for haying! What hay it’ll be!” said an old man,
squatting down beside Levin. “It’s tea, not hay! It’s like scattering
grain to the ducks, the way they pick it up!” he added, pointing to the
growing haycocks. “Since dinner time they’ve carried a good half of
it.”

“The last load, eh?” he shouted to a young peasant, who drove by,
standing in the front of an empty cart, shaking the cord reins.

“The last, dad!” the lad shouted back, pulling in the horse, and,
smiling, he looked round at a bright, rosy-checked peasant girl who sat
in the cart smiling too, and drove on.

“Who’s that? Your son?” asked Levin.

“My baby,” said the old man with a tender smile.

“What a fine fellow!”

“The lad’s all right.”

“Married already?”

“Yes, it’s two years last St. Philip’s day.”

“Any children?”

“Children indeed! Why, for over a year he was innocent as a babe
himself, and bashful too,” answered the old man. “Well, the hay! It’s
as fragrant as tea!” he repeated, wishing to change the subject.

Levin looked more attentively at Ivan Parmenov and his wife. They were
loading a haycock onto the cart not far from him. Ivan Parmenov was
standing on the cart, taking, laying in place, and stamping down the
huge bundles of hay, which his pretty young wife deftly handed up to
him, at first in armfuls, and then on the pitchfork. The young wife
worked easily, merrily, and dexterously. The close-packed hay did not
once break away off her fork. First she gathered it together, stuck the
fork into it, then with a rapid, supple movement leaned the whole
weight of her body on it, and at once with a bend of her back under the
red belt she drew herself up, and arching her full bosom under the
white smock, with a smart turn swung the fork in her arms, and flung
the bundle of hay high onto the cart. Ivan, obviously doing his best to
save her every minute of unnecessary labor, made haste, opening his
arms to clutch the bundle and lay it in the cart. As she raked together
what was left of the hay, the young wife shook off the bits of hay that
had fallen on her neck, and straightening the red kerchief that had
dropped forward over her white brow, not browned like her face by the
sun, she crept under the cart to tie up the load. Ivan directed her how
to fasten the cord to the cross-piece, and at something she said he
laughed aloud. In the expressions of both faces was to be seen
vigorous, young, freshly awakened love.


Chapter 12

The load was tied on. Ivan jumped down and took the quiet, sleek horse
by the bridle. The young wife flung the rake up on the load, and with a
bold step, swinging her arms, she went to join the women, who were
forming a ring for the haymakers’ dance. Ivan drove off to the road and
fell into line with the other loaded carts. The peasant women, with
their rakes on their shoulders, gay with bright flowers, and chattering
with ringing, merry voices, walked behind the hay cart. One wild
untrained female voice broke into a song, and sang it alone through a
verse, and then the same verse was taken up and repeated by half a
hundred strong healthy voices, of all sorts, coarse and fine, singing
in unison.

The women, all singing, began to come close to Levin, and he felt as
though a storm were swooping down upon him with a thunder of merriment.
The storm swooped down, enveloped him and the haycock on which he was
lying, and the other haycocks, and the wagon-loads, and the whole
meadow and distant fields all seemed to be shaking and singing to the
measures of this wild merry song with its shouts and whistles and
clapping. Levin felt envious of this health and mirthfulness; he longed
to take part in the expression of this joy of life. But he could do
nothing, and had to lie and look on and listen. When the peasants, with
their singing, had vanished out of sight and hearing, a weary feeling
of despondency at his own isolation, his physical inactivity, his
alienation from this world, came over Levin.

Some of the very peasants who had been most active in wrangling with
him over the hay, some whom he had treated with contumely, and who had
tried to cheat him, those very peasants had greeted him good-humoredly,
and evidently had not, were incapable of having any feeling of rancor
against him, any regret, any recollection even of having tried to
deceive him. All that was drowned in a sea of merry common labor. God
gave the day, God gave the strength. And the day and the strength were
consecrated to labor, and that labor was its own reward. For whom the
labor? What would be its fruits? These were idle considerations—beside
the point.

Often Levin had admired this life, often he had a sense of envy of the
men who led this life; but today for the first time, especially under
the influence of what he had seen in the attitude of Ivan Parmenov to
his young wife, the idea presented itself definitely to his mind that
it was in his power to exchange the dreary, artificial, idle, and
individualistic life he was leading for this laborious, pure, and
socially delightful life.

The old man who had been sitting beside him had long ago gone home; the
people had all separated. Those who lived near had gone home, while
those who came from far were gathered into a group for supper, and to
spend the night in the meadow. Levin, unobserved by the peasants, still
lay on the haycock, and still looked on and listened and mused. The
peasants who remained for the night in the meadow scarcely slept all
the short summer night. At first there was the sound of merry talk and
laughing all together over the supper, then singing again and laughter.

All the long day of toil had left no trace in them but lightness of
heart. Before the early dawn all was hushed. Nothing was to be heard
but the night sounds of the frogs that never ceased in the marsh, and
the horses snorting in the mist that rose over the meadow before the
morning. Rousing himself, Levin got up from the haycock, and looking at
the stars, he saw that the night was over.

“Well, what am I going to do? How am I to set about it?” he said to
himself, trying to express to himself all the thoughts and feelings he
had passed through in that brief night. All the thoughts and feelings
he had passed through fell into three separate trains of thought. One
was the renunciation of his old life, of his utterly useless education.
This renunciation gave him satisfaction, and was easy and simple.
Another series of thoughts and mental images related to the life he
longed to live now. The simplicity, the purity, the sanity of this life
he felt clearly, and he was convinced he would find in it the content,
the peace, and the dignity, of the lack of which he was so miserably
conscious. But a third series of ideas turned upon the question how to
effect this transition from the old life to the new. And there nothing
took clear shape for him. “Have a wife? Have work and the necessity of
work? Leave Pokrovskoe? Buy land? Become a member of a peasant
community? Marry a peasant girl? How am I to set about it?” he asked
himself again, and could not find an answer. “I haven’t slept all
night, though, and I can’t think it out clearly,” he said to himself.
“I’ll work it out later. One thing’s certain, this night has decided my
fate. All my old dreams of home life were absurd, not the real thing,”
he told himself. “It’s all ever so much simpler and better....”

“How beautiful!” he thought, looking at the strange, as it were,
mother-of-pearl shell of white fleecy cloudlets resting right over his
head in the middle of the sky. “How exquisite it all is in this
exquisite night! And when was there time for that cloud-shell to form?
Just now I looked at the sky, and there was nothing in it—only two
white streaks. Yes, and so imperceptibly too my views of life changed!”

He went out of the meadow and walked along the highroad towards the
village. A slight wind arose, and the sky looked gray and sullen. The
gloomy moment had come that usually precedes the dawn, the full triumph
of light over darkness.

Shrinking from the cold, Levin walked rapidly, looking at the ground.
“What’s that? Someone coming,” he thought, catching the tinkle of
bells, and lifting his head. Forty paces from him a carriage with four
horses harnessed abreast was driving towards him along the grassy road
on which he was walking. The shaft-horses were tilted against the
shafts by the ruts, but the dexterous driver sitting on the box held
the shaft over the ruts, so that the wheels ran on the smooth part of
the road.

This was all Levin noticed, and without wondering who it could be, he
gazed absently at the coach.

In the coach was an old lady dozing in one corner, and at the window,
evidently only just awake, sat a young girl holding in both hands the
ribbons of a white cap. With a face full of light and thought, full of
a subtle, complex inner life, that was remote from Levin, she was
gazing beyond him at the glow of the sunrise.

At the very instant when this apparition was vanishing, the truthful
eyes glanced at him. She recognized him, and her face lighted up with
wondering delight.

He could not be mistaken. There were no other eyes like those in the
world. There was only one creature in the world that could concentrate
for him all the brightness and meaning of life. It was she. It was
Kitty. He understood that she was driving to Ergushovo from the railway
station. And everything that had been stirring Levin during that
sleepless night, all the resolutions he had made, all vanished at once.
He recalled with horror his dreams of marrying a peasant girl. There
only, in the carriage that had crossed over to the other side of the
road, and was rapidly disappearing, there only could he find the
solution of the riddle of his life, which had weighed so agonizingly
upon him of late.

She did not look out again. The sound of the carriage-springs was no
longer audible, the bells could scarcely be heard. The barking of dogs
showed the carriage had reached the village, and all that was left was
the empty fields all round, the village in front, and he himself
isolated and apart from it all, wandering lonely along the deserted
highroad.

He glanced at the sky, expecting to find there the cloud shell he had
been admiring and taking as the symbol of the ideas and feelings of
that night. There was nothing in the sky in the least like a shell.
There, in the remote heights above, a mysterious change had been
accomplished. There was no trace of shell, and there was stretched over
fully half the sky an even cover of tiny and ever tinier cloudlets. The
sky had grown blue and bright; and with the same softness, but with the
same remoteness, it met his questioning gaze.

“No,” he said to himself, “however good that life of simplicity and
toil may be, I cannot go back to it. I love _her_.”


Chapter 13

None but those who were most intimate with Alexey Alexandrovitch knew
that, while on the surface the coldest and most reasonable of men, he
had one weakness quite opposed to the general trend of his character.
Alexey Alexandrovitch could not hear or see a child or woman crying
without being moved. The sight of tears threw him into a state of
nervous agitation, and he utterly lost all power of reflection. The
chief secretary of his department and his private secretary were aware
of this, and used to warn women who came with petitions on no account
to give way to tears, if they did not want to ruin their chances. “He
will get angry, and will not listen to you,” they used to say. And as a
fact, in such cases the emotional disturbance set up in Alexey
Alexandrovitch by the sight of tears found expression in hasty anger.
“I can do nothing. Kindly leave the room!” he would commonly cry in
such cases.

When returning from the races Anna had informed him of her relations
with Vronsky, and immediately afterwards had burst into tears, hiding
her face in her hands, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for all the fury aroused
in him against her, was aware at the same time of a rush of that
emotional disturbance always produced in him by tears. Conscious of it,
and conscious that any expression of his feelings at that minute would
be out of keeping with the position, he tried to suppress every
manifestation of life in himself, and so neither stirred nor looked at
her. This was what had caused that strange expression of deathlike
rigidity in his face which had so impressed Anna.

When they reached the house he helped her to get out of the carriage,
and making an effort to master himself, took leave of her with his
usual urbanity, and uttered that phrase that bound him to nothing; he
said that tomorrow he would let her know his decision.

His wife’s words, confirming his worst suspicions, had sent a cruel
pang to the heart of Alexey Alexandrovitch. That pang was intensified
by the strange feeling of physical pity for her set up by her tears.
But when he was all alone in the carriage Alexey Alexandrovitch, to his
surprise and delight, felt complete relief both from this pity and from
the doubts and agonies of jealousy.

He experienced the sensations of a man who has had a tooth out after
suffering long from toothache. After a fearful agony and a sense of
something huge, bigger than the head itself, being torn out of his jaw,
the sufferer, hardly able to believe in his own good luck, feels all at
once that what has so long poisoned his existence and enchained his
attention, exists no longer, and that he can live and think again, and
take interest in other things besides his tooth. This feeling Alexey
Alexandrovitch was experiencing. The agony had been strange and
terrible, but now it was over; he felt that he could live again and
think of something other than his wife.

“No honor, no heart, no religion; a corrupt woman. I always knew it and
always saw it, though I tried to deceive myself to spare her,” he said
to himself. And it actually seemed to him that he always had seen it:
he recalled incidents of their past life, in which he had never seen
anything wrong before—now these incidents proved clearly that she had
always been a corrupt woman. “I made a mistake in linking my life to
hers; but there was nothing wrong in my mistake, and so I cannot be
unhappy. It’s not I that am to blame,” he told himself, “but she. But I
have nothing to do with her. She does not exist for me....”

Everything relating to her and her son, towards whom his sentiments
were as much changed as towards her, ceased to interest him. The only
thing that interested him now was the question of in what way he could
best, with most propriety and comfort for himself, and thus with most
justice, extricate himself from the mud with which she had spattered
him in her fall, and then proceed along his path of active, honorable,
and useful existence.

“I cannot be made unhappy by the fact that a contemptible woman has
committed a crime. I have only to find the best way out of the
difficult position in which she has placed me. And I shall find it,” he
said to himself, frowning more and more. “I’m not the first nor the
last.” And to say nothing of historical instances dating from the “Fair
Helen” of Menelaus, recently revived in the memory of all, a whole list
of contemporary examples of husbands with unfaithful wives in the
highest society rose before Alexey Alexandrovitch’s imagination.
“Daryalov, Poltavsky, Prince Karibanov, Count Paskudin, Dram.... Yes,
even Dram, such an honest, capable fellow ... Semyonov, Tchagin,
Sigonin,” Alexey Alexandrovitch remembered. “Admitting that a certain
quite irrational _ridicule_ falls to the lot of these men, yet I never
saw anything but a misfortune in it, and always felt sympathy for it,”
Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself, though indeed this was not the
fact, and he had never felt sympathy for misfortunes of that kind, but
the more frequently he had heard of instances of unfaithful wives
betraying their husbands, the more highly he had thought of himself.
“It is a misfortune which may befall anyone. And this misfortune has
befallen me. The only thing to be done is to make the best of the
position.”

And he began passing in review the methods of proceeding of men who had
been in the same position that he was in.

“Daryalov fought a duel....”

The duel had particularly fascinated the thoughts of Alexey
Alexandrovitch in his youth, just because he was physically a coward,
and was himself well aware of the fact. Alexey Alexandrovitch could not
without horror contemplate the idea of a pistol aimed at himself, and
had never made use of any weapon in his life. This horror had in his
youth set him pondering on dueling, and picturing himself in a position
in which he would have to expose his life to danger. Having attained
success and an established position in the world, he had long ago
forgotten this feeling; but the habitual bent of feeling reasserted
itself, and dread of his own cowardice proved even now so strong that
Alexey Alexandrovitch spent a long while thinking over the question of
dueling in all its aspects, and hugging the idea of a duel, though he
was fully aware beforehand that he would never under any circumstances
fight one.

“There’s no doubt our society is still so barbarous (it’s not the same
in England) that very many”—and among these were those whose opinion
Alexey Alexandrovitch particularly valued—“look favorably on the duel;
but what result is attained by it? Suppose I call him out,” Alexey
Alexandrovitch went on to himself, and vividly picturing the night he
would spend after the challenge, and the pistol aimed at him, he
shuddered, and knew that he never would do it—“suppose I call him out.
Suppose I am taught,” he went on musing, “to shoot; I press the
trigger,” he said to himself, closing his eyes, “and it turns out I
have killed him,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself, and he shook
his head as though to dispel such silly ideas. “What sense is there in
murdering a man in order to define one’s relation to a guilty wife and
son? I should still just as much have to decide what I ought to do with
her. But what is more probable and what would doubtless occur—I should
be killed or wounded. I, the innocent person, should be the
victim—killed or wounded. It’s even more senseless. But apart from
that, a challenge to fight would be an act hardly honest on my side.
Don’t I know perfectly well that my friends would never allow me to
fight a duel—would never allow the life of a statesman, needed by
Russia, to be exposed to danger? Knowing perfectly well beforehand that
the matter would never come to real danger, it would amount to my
simply trying to gain a certain sham reputation by such a challenge.
That would be dishonest, that would be false, that would be deceiving
myself and others. A duel is quite irrational, and no one expects it of
me. My aim is simply to safeguard my reputation, which is essential for
the uninterrupted pursuit of my public duties.” Official duties, which
had always been of great consequence in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s eyes,
seemed of special importance to his mind at this moment. Considering
and rejecting the duel, Alexey Alexandrovitch turned to divorce—another
solution selected by several of the husbands he remembered. Passing in
mental review all the instances he knew of divorces (there were plenty
of them in the very highest society with which he was very familiar),
Alexey Alexandrovitch could not find a single example in which the
object of divorce was that which he had in view. In all these instances
the husband had practically ceded or sold his unfaithful wife, and the
very party which, being in fault, had not the right to contract a fresh
marriage, had formed counterfeit, pseudo-matrimonial ties with a
self-styled husband. In his own case, Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that a
legal divorce, that is to say, one in which only the guilty wife would
be repudiated, was impossible of attainment. He saw that the complex
conditions of the life they led made the coarse proofs of his wife’s
guilt, required by the law, out of the question; he saw that a certain
refinement in that life would not admit of such proofs being brought
forward, even if he had them, and that to bring forward such proofs
would damage him in the public estimation more than it would her.

An attempt at divorce could lead to nothing but a public scandal, which
would be a perfect godsend to his enemies for calumny and attacks on
his high position in society. His chief object, to define the position
with the least amount of disturbance possible, would not be attained by
divorce either. Moreover, in the event of divorce, or even of an
attempt to obtain a divorce, it was obvious that the wife broke off all
relations with the husband and threw in her lot with the lover. And in
spite of the complete, as he supposed, contempt and indifference he now
felt for his wife, at the bottom of his heart Alexey Alexandrovitch
still had one feeling left in regard to her—a disinclination to see her
free to throw in her lot with Vronsky, so that her crime would be to
her advantage. The mere notion of this so exasperated Alexey
Alexandrovitch, that directly it rose to his mind he groaned with
inward agony, and got up and changed his place in the carriage, and for
a long while after, he sat with scowling brows, wrapping his numbed and
bony legs in the fleecy rug.

“Apart from formal divorce, One might still do like Karibanov,
Paskudin, and that good fellow Dram—that is, separate from one’s wife,”
he went on thinking, when he had regained his composure. But this step
too presented the same drawback of public scandal as a divorce, and
what was more, a separation, quite as much as a regular divorce, flung
his wife into the arms of Vronsky. “No, it’s out of the question, out
of the question!” he said again, twisting his rug about him again. “I
cannot be unhappy, but neither she nor he ought to be happy.”

The feeling of jealousy, which had tortured him during the period of
uncertainty, had passed away at the instant when the tooth had been
with agony extracted by his wife’s words. But that feeling had been
replaced by another, the desire, not merely that she should not be
triumphant, but that she should get due punishment for her crime. He
did not acknowledge this feeling, but at the bottom of his heart he
longed for her to suffer for having destroyed his peace of mind—his
honor. And going once again over the conditions inseparable from a
duel, a divorce, a separation, and once again rejecting them, Alexey
Alexandrovitch felt convinced that there was only one solution,—to keep
her with him, concealing what had happened from the world, and using
every measure in his power to break off the intrigue, and still
more—though this he did not admit to himself—to punish her. “I must
inform her of my conclusion, that thinking over the terrible position
in which she has placed her family, all other solutions will be worse
for both sides than an external _status quo_, and that such I agree to
retain, on the strict condition of obedience on her part to my wishes,
that is to say, cessation of all intercourse with her lover.” When this
decision had been finally adopted, another weighty consideration
occurred to Alexey Alexandrovitch in support of it. “By such a course
only shall I be acting in accordance with the dictates of religion,” he
told himself. “In adopting this course, I am not casting off a guilty
wife, but giving her a chance of amendment; and, indeed, difficult as
the task will be to me, I shall devote part of my energies to her
reformation and salvation.”

Though Alexey Alexandrovitch was perfectly aware that he could not
exert any moral influence over his wife, that such an attempt at
reformation could lead to nothing but falsity; though in passing
through these difficult moments he had not once thought of seeking
guidance in religion, yet now, when his conclusion corresponded, as it
seemed to him, with the requirements of religion, this religious
sanction to his decision gave him complete satisfaction, and to some
extent restored his peace of mind. He was pleased to think that, even
in such an important crisis in life, no one would be able to say that
he had not acted in accordance with the principles of that religion
whose banner he had always held aloft amid the general coolness and
indifference. As he pondered over subsequent developments, Alexey
Alexandrovitch did not see, indeed, why his relations with his wife
should not remain practically the same as before. No doubt, she could
never regain his esteem, but there was not, and there could not be, any
sort of reason that his existence should be troubled, and that he
should suffer because she was a bad and faithless wife. “Yes, time will
pass; time, which arranges all things, and the old relations will be
reestablished,” Alexey Alexandrovitch told himself; “so far
reestablished, that is, that I shall not be sensible of a break in the
continuity of my life. She is bound to be unhappy, but I am not to
blame, and so I cannot be unhappy.”


Chapter 14

As he neared Petersburg, Alexey Alexandrovitch not only adhered
entirely to his decision, but was even composing in his head the letter
he would write to his wife. Going into the porter’s room, Alexey
Alexandrovitch glanced at the letters and papers brought from his
office, and directed that they should be brought to him in his study.

“The horses can be taken out and I will see no one,” he said in answer
to the porter, with a certain pleasure, indicative of his agreeable
frame of mind, emphasizing the words, “see no one.”

In his study Alexey Alexandrovitch walked up and down twice, and
stopped at an immense writing-table, on which six candles had already
been lighted by the valet who had preceded him. He cracked his knuckles
and sat down, sorting out his writing appurtenances. Putting his elbows
on the table, he bent his head on one side, thought a minute, and began
to write, without pausing for a second. He wrote without using any form
of address to her, and wrote in French, making use of the plural
“_vous_,” which has not the same note of coldness as the corresponding
Russian form.





“At our last conversation, I notified you of my intention to
communicate to you my decision in regard to the subject of that
conversation. Having carefully considered everything, I am writing now
with the object of fulfilling that promise. My decision is as follows.
Whatever your conduct may have been, I do not consider myself justified
in breaking the ties in which we are bound by a Higher Power. The
family cannot be broken up by a whim, a caprice, or even by the sin of
one of the partners in the marriage, and our life must go on as it has
done in the past. This is essential for me, for you, and for our son. I
am fully persuaded that you have repented and do repent of what has
called forth the present letter, and that you will cooperate with me in
eradicating the cause of our estrangement, and forgetting the past. In
the contrary event, you can conjecture what awaits you and your son.
All this I hope to discuss more in detail in a personal interview. As
the season is drawing to a close, I would beg you to return to
Petersburg as quickly as possible, not later than Tuesday. All
necessary preparations shall be made for your arrival here. I beg you
to note that I attach particular significance to compliance with this
request.

A. Karenin

“_P.S._—I enclose the money which may be needed for your expenses.”





He read the letter through and felt pleased with it, and especially
that he had remembered to enclose money: there was not a harsh word,
not a reproach in it, nor was there undue indulgence. Most of all, it
was a golden bridge for return. Folding the letter and smoothing it
with a massive ivory knife, and putting it in an envelope with the
money, he rang the bell with the gratification it always afforded him
to use the well arranged appointments of his writing-table.

“Give this to the courier to be delivered to Anna Arkadyevna tomorrow
at the summer villa,” he said, getting up.

“Certainly, your excellency; tea to be served in the study?”

Alexey Alexandrovitch ordered tea to be brought to the study, and
playing with the massive paper-knife, he moved to his easy chair, near
which there had been placed ready for him a lamp and the French work on
Egyptian hieroglyphics that he had begun. Over the easy chair there
hung in a gold frame an oval portrait of Anna, a fine painting by a
celebrated artist. Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at it. The
unfathomable eyes gazed ironically and insolently at him. Insufferably
insolent and challenging was the effect in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s eyes
of the black lace about the head, admirably touched in by the painter,
the black hair and handsome white hand with one finger lifted, covered
with rings. After looking at the portrait for a minute, Alexey
Alexandrovitch shuddered so that his lips quivered and he uttered the
sound “brrr,” and turned away. He made haste to sit down in his easy
chair and opened the book. He tried to read, but he could not revive
the very vivid interest he had felt before in Egyptian hieroglyphics.
He looked at the book and thought of something else. He thought not of
his wife, but of a complication that had arisen in his official life,
which at the time constituted the chief interest of it. He felt that he
had penetrated more deeply than ever before into this intricate affair,
and that he had originated a leading idea—he could say it without
self-flattery—calculated to clear up the whole business, to strengthen
him in his official career, to discomfit his enemies, and thereby to be
of the greatest benefit to the government. Directly the servant had set
the tea and left the room, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up and went to the
writing-table. Moving into the middle of the table a portfolio of
papers, with a scarcely perceptible smile of self-satisfaction, he took
a pencil from a rack and plunged into the perusal of a complex report
relating to the present complication. The complication was of this
nature: Alexey Alexandrovitch’s characteristic quality as a politician,
that special individual qualification that every rising functionary
possesses, the qualification that with his unflagging ambition, his
reserve, his honesty, and with his self-confidence had made his career,
was his contempt for red tape, his cutting down of correspondence, his
direct contact, wherever possible, with the living fact, and his
economy. It happened that the famous Commission of the 2nd of June had
set on foot an inquiry into the irrigation of lands in the Zaraisky
province, which fell under Alexey Alexandrovitch’s department, and was
a glaring example of fruitless expenditure and paper reforms. Alexey
Alexandrovitch was aware of the truth of this. The irrigation of these
lands in the Zaraisky province had been initiated by the predecessor of
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s predecessor. And vast sums of money had
actually been spent and were still being spent on this business, and
utterly unproductively, and the whole business could obviously lead to
nothing whatever. Alexey Alexandrovitch had perceived this at once on
entering office, and would have liked to lay hands on the Board of
Irrigation. But at first, when he did not yet feel secure in his
position, he knew it would affect too many interests, and would be
injudicious. Later on he had been engrossed in other questions, and had
simply forgotten the Board of Irrigation. It went of itself, like all
such boards, by the mere force of inertia. (Many people gained their
livelihood by the Board of Irrigation, especially one highly
conscientious and musical family: all the daughters played on stringed
instruments, and Alexey Alexandrovitch knew the family and had stood
godfather to one of the elder daughters.) The raising of this question
by a hostile department was in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s opinion a
dishonorable proceeding, seeing that in every department there were
things similar and worse, which no one inquired into, for well-known
reasons of official etiquette. However, now that the glove had been
thrown down to him, he had boldly picked it up and demanded the
appointment of a special commission to investigate and verify the
working of the Board of Irrigation of the lands in the Zaraisky
province. But in compensation he gave no quarter to the enemy either.
He demanded the appointment of another special commission to inquire
into the question of the Native Tribes Organization Committee. The
question of the Native Tribes had been brought up incidentally in the
Commission of the 2nd of June, and had been pressed forward actively by
Alexey Alexandrovitch as one admitting of no delay on account of the
deplorable condition of the native tribes. In the commission this
question had been a ground of contention between several departments.
The department hostile to Alexey Alexandrovitch proved that the
condition of the native tribes was exceedingly flourishing, that the
proposed reconstruction might be the ruin of their prosperity, and that
if there were anything wrong, it arose mainly from the failure on the
part of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s department to carry out the measures
prescribed by law. Now Alexey Alexandrovitch intended to demand: First,
that a new commission should be formed which should be empowered to
investigate the condition of the native tribes on the spot; secondly,
if it should appear that the condition of the native tribes actually
was such as it appeared to be from the official documents in the hands
of the committee, that another new scientific commission should be
appointed to investigate the deplorable condition of the native tribes
from the—(1) political, (2) administrative, (3) economic, (4)
ethnographical, (5) material, and (6) religious points of view;
thirdly, that evidence should be required from the rival department of
the measures that had been taken during the last ten years by that
department for averting the disastrous conditions in which the native
tribes were now placed; and fourthly and finally, that that department
explain why it had, as appeared from the evidence before the committee,
from No. 17,015 and 18,038, from December 5, 1863, and June 7, 1864,
acted in direct contravention of the intent of the law T... Act 18, and
the note to Act 36. A flash of eagerness suffused the face of Alexey
Alexandrovitch as he rapidly wrote out a synopsis of these ideas for
his own benefit. Having filled a sheet of paper, he got up, rang, and
sent a note to the chief secretary of his department to look up certain
necessary facts for him. Getting up and walking about the room, he
glanced again at the portrait, frowned, and smiled contemptuously.
After reading a little more of the book on Egyptian hieroglyphics, and
renewing his interest in it, Alexey Alexandrovitch went to bed at
eleven o’clock, and recollecting as he lay in bed the incident with his
wife, he saw it now in by no means such a gloomy light.


Chapter 15

Though Anna had obstinately and with exasperation contradicted Vronsky
when he told her their position was impossible, at the bottom of her
heart she regarded her own position as false and dishonorable, and she
longed with her whole soul to change it. On the way home from the races
she had told her husband the truth in a moment of excitement, and in
spite of the agony she had suffered in doing so, she was glad of it.
After her husband had left her, she told herself that she was glad,
that now everything was made clear, and at least there would be no more
lying and deception. It seemed to her beyond doubt that her position
was now made clear forever. It might be bad, this new position, but it
would be clear; there would be no indefiniteness or falsehood about it.
The pain she had caused herself and her husband in uttering those words
would be rewarded now by everything being made clear, she thought. That
evening she saw Vronsky, but she did not tell him of what had passed
between her and her husband, though, to make the position definite, it
was necessary to tell him.

When she woke up next morning the first thing that rose to her mind was
what she had said to her husband, and those words seemed to her so
awful that she could not conceive now how she could have brought
herself to utter those strange, coarse words, and could not imagine
what would come of it. But the words were spoken, and Alexey
Alexandrovitch had gone away without saying anything. “I saw Vronsky
and did not tell him. At the very instant he was going away I would
have turned him back and told him, but I changed my mind, because it
was strange that I had not told him the first minute. Why was it I
wanted to tell him and did not tell him?” And in answer to this
question a burning blush of shame spread over her face. She knew what
had kept her from it, she knew that she had been ashamed. Her position,
which had seemed to her simplified the night before, suddenly struck
her now as not only not simple, but as absolutely hopeless. She felt
terrified at the disgrace, of which she had not ever thought before.
Directly she thought of what her husband would do, the most terrible
ideas came to her mind. She had a vision of being turned out of the
house, of her shame being proclaimed to all the world. She asked
herself where she should go when she was turned out of the house, and
she could not find an answer.

When she thought of Vronsky, it seemed to her that he did not love her,
that he was already beginning to be tired of her, that she could not
offer herself to him, and she felt bitter against him for it. It seemed
to her that the words that she had spoken to her husband, and had
continually repeated in her imagination, she had said to everyone, and
everyone had heard them. She could not bring herself to look those of
her own household in the face. She could not bring herself to call her
maid, and still less go downstairs and see her son and his governess.

The maid, who had been listening at her door for a long while, came
into her room of her own accord. Anna glanced inquiringly into her
face, and blushed with a scared look. The maid begged her pardon for
coming in, saying that she had fancied the bell rang. She brought her
clothes and a note. The note was from Betsy. Betsy reminded her that
Liza Merkalova and Baroness Shtoltz were coming to play croquet with
her that morning with their adorers, Kaluzhsky and old Stremov. “Come,
if only as a study in morals. I shall expect you,” she finished.

Anna read the note and heaved a deep sigh.

“Nothing, I need nothing,” she said to Annushka, who was rearranging
the bottles and brushes on the dressing table. “You can go. I’ll dress
at once and come down. I need nothing.”

Annushka went out, but Anna did not begin dressing, and sat in the same
position, her head and hands hanging listlessly, and every now and then
she shivered all over, seemed as though she would make some gesture,
utter some word, and sank back into lifelessness again. She repeated
continually, “My God! my God!” But neither “God” nor “my” had any
meaning to her. The idea of seeking help in her difficulty in religion
was as remote from her as seeking help from Alexey Alexandrovitch
himself, although she had never had doubts of the faith in which she
had been brought up. She knew that the support of religion was possible
only upon condition of renouncing what made up for her the whole
meaning of life. She was not simply miserable, she began to feel alarm
at the new spiritual condition, never experienced before, in which she
found herself. She felt as though everything were beginning to be
double in her soul, just as objects sometimes appear double to
over-tired eyes. She hardly knew at times what it was she feared, and
what she hoped for. Whether she feared or desired what had happened, or
what was going to happen, and exactly what she longed for, she could
not have said.

“Ah, what am I doing!” she said to herself, feeling a sudden thrill of
pain in both sides of her head. When she came to herself, she saw that
she was holding her hair in both hands, each side of her temples, and
pulling it. She jumped up, and began walking about.

“The coffee is ready, and mademoiselle and Seryozha are waiting,” said
Annushka, coming back again and finding Anna in the same position.

“Seryozha? What about Seryozha?” Anna asked, with sudden eagerness,
recollecting her son’s existence for the first time that morning.

“He’s been naughty, I think,” answered Annushka with a smile.

“In what way?”

“Some peaches were lying on the table in the corner room. I think he
slipped in and ate one of them on the sly.”

The recollection of her son suddenly roused Anna from the helpless
condition in which she found herself. She recalled the partly sincere,
though greatly exaggerated, rôle of the mother living for her child,
which she had taken up of late years, and she felt with joy that in the
plight in which she found herself she had a support, quite apart from
her relation to her husband or to Vronsky. This support was her son. In
whatever position she might be placed, she could not lose her son. Her
husband might put her to shame and turn her out, Vronsky might grow
cold to her and go on living his own life apart (she thought of him
again with bitterness and reproach); she could not leave her son. She
had an aim in life. And she must act; act to secure this relation to
her son, so that he might not be taken from her. Quickly indeed, as
quickly as possible, she must take action before he was taken from her.
She must take her son and go away. Here was the one thing she had to do
now. She needed consolation. She must be calm, and get out of this
insufferable position. The thought of immediate action binding her to
her son, of going away somewhere with him, gave her this consolation.

She dressed quickly, went downstairs, and with resolute steps walked
into the drawing-room, where she found, as usual, waiting for her, the
coffee, Seryozha, and his governess. Seryozha, all in white, with his
back and head bent, was standing at a table under a looking-glass, and
with an expression of intense concentration which she knew well, and in
which he resembled his father, he was doing something to the flowers he
carried.

The governess had a particularly severe expression. Seryozha screamed
shrilly, as he often did, “Ah, mamma!” and stopped, hesitating whether
to go to greet his mother and put down the flowers, or to finish making
the wreath and go with the flowers.

The governess, after saying good-morning, began a long and detailed
account of Seryozha’s naughtiness, but Anna did not hear her; she was
considering whether she would take her with her or not. “No, I won’t
take her,” she decided. “I’ll go alone with my child.”

“Yes, it’s very wrong,” said Anna, and taking her son by the shoulder
she looked at him, not severely, but with a timid glance that
bewildered and delighted the boy, and she kissed him. “Leave him to
me,” she said to the astonished governess, and not letting go of her
son, she sat down at the table, where coffee was set ready for her.

“Mamma! I ... I ... didn’t....” he said, trying to make out from her
expression what was in store for him in regard to the peaches.

“Seryozha,” she said, as soon as the governess had left the room, “that
was wrong, but you’ll never do it again, will you?... You love me?”

She felt that the tears were coming into her eyes. “Can I help loving
him?” she said to herself, looking deeply into his scared and at the
same time delighted eyes. “And can he ever join his father in punishing
me? Is it possible he will not feel for me?” Tears were already flowing
down her face, and to hide them she got up abruptly and almost ran out
on to the terrace.

After the thunder showers of the last few days, cold, bright weather
had set in. The air was cold in the bright sun that filtered through
the freshly washed leaves.

She shivered, both from the cold and from the inward horror which had
clutched her with fresh force in the open air.

“Run along, run along to Mariette,” she said to Seryozha, who had
followed her out, and she began walking up and down on the straw
matting of the terrace. “Can it be that they won’t forgive me, won’t
understand how it all couldn’t be helped?” she said to herself.

Standing still, and looking at the tops of the aspen trees waving in
the wind, with their freshly washed, brightly shining leaves in the
cold sunshine, she knew that they would not forgive her, that everyone
and everything would be merciless to her now as was that sky, that
green. And again she felt that everything was split in two in her soul.
“I mustn’t, mustn’t think,” she said to herself. “I must get ready. To
go where? When? Whom to take with me? Yes, to Moscow by the evening
train. Annushka and Seryozha, and only the most necessary things. But
first I must write to them both.” She went quickly indoors into her
boudoir, sat down at the table, and wrote to her husband:—“After what
has happened, I cannot remain any longer in your house. I am going
away, and taking my son with me. I don’t know the law, and so I don’t
know with which of the parents the son should remain; but I take him
with me because I cannot live without him. Be generous, leave him to
me.”

Up to this point she wrote rapidly and naturally, but the appeal to his
generosity, a quality she did not recognize in him, and the necessity
of winding up the letter with something touching, pulled her up. “Of my
fault and my remorse I cannot speak, because....”

She stopped again, finding no connection in her ideas. “No,” she said
to herself, “there’s no need of anything,” and tearing up the letter,
she wrote it again, leaving out the allusion to generosity, and sealed
it up.

Another letter had to be written to Vronsky. “I have told my husband,”
she wrote, and she sat a long while unable to write more. It was so
coarse, so unfeminine. “And what more am I to write to him?” she said
to herself. Again a flush of shame spread over her face; she recalled
his composure, and a feeling of anger against him impelled her to tear
the sheet with the phrase she had written into tiny bits. “No need of
anything,” she said to herself, and closing her blotting-case she went
upstairs, told the governess and the servants that she was going that
day to Moscow, and at once set to work to pack up her things.


Chapter 16

All the rooms of the summer villa were full of porters, gardeners, and
footmen going to and fro carrying out things. Cupboards and chests were
open; twice they had sent to the shop for cord; pieces of newspaper
were tossing about on the floor. Two trunks, some bags and strapped-up
rugs, had been carried down into the hall. The carriage and two hired
cabs were waiting at the steps. Anna, forgetting her inward agitation
in the work of packing, was standing at a table in her boudoir, packing
her traveling bag, when Annushka called her attention to the rattle of
some carriage driving up. Anna looked out of the window and saw Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s courier on the steps, ringing at the front door bell.

“Run and find out what it is,” she said, and with a calm sense of being
prepared for anything, she sat down in a low chair, folding her hands
on her knees. A footman brought in a thick packet directed in Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s hand.

“The courier has orders to wait for an answer,” he said.

“Very well,” she said, and as soon as he had left the room she tore
open the letter with trembling fingers. A roll of unfolded notes done
up in a wrapper fell out of it. She disengaged the letter and began
reading it at the end. “Preparations shall be made for your arrival
here ... I attach particular significance to compliance....” she read.
She ran on, then back, read it all through, and once more read the
letter all through again from the beginning. When she had finished, she
felt that she was cold all over, and that a fearful calamity, such as
she had not expected, had burst upon her.

In the morning she had regretted that she had spoken to her husband,
and wished for nothing so much as that those words could be unspoken.
And here this letter regarded them as unspoken, and gave her what she
had wanted. But now this letter seemed to her more awful than anything
she had been able to conceive.

“He’s right!” she said; “of course, he’s always right; he’s a
Christian, he’s generous! Yes, vile, base creature! And no one
understands it except me, and no one ever will; and I can’t explain it.
They say he’s so religious, so high-principled, so upright, so clever;
but they don’t see what I’ve seen. They don’t know how he has crushed
my life for eight years, crushed everything that was living in me—he
has not once even thought that I’m a live woman who must have love.
They don’t know how at every step he’s humiliated me, and been just as
pleased with himself. Haven’t I striven, striven with all my strength,
to find something to give meaning to my life? Haven’t I struggled to
love him, to love my son when I could not love my husband? But the time
came when I knew that I couldn’t cheat myself any longer, that I was
alive, that I was not to blame, that God has made me so that I must
love and live. And now what does he do? If he’d killed me, if he’d
killed him, I could have borne anything, I could have forgiven
anything; but, no, he.... How was it I didn’t guess what he would do?
He’s doing just what’s characteristic of his mean character. He’ll keep
himself in the right, while me, in my ruin, he’ll drive still lower to
worse ruin yet....”

She recalled the words from the letter. “You can conjecture what awaits
you and your son....” “That’s a threat to take away my child, and most
likely by their stupid law he can. But I know very well why he says it.
He doesn’t believe even in my love for my child, or he despises it
(just as he always used to ridicule it). He despises that feeling in
me, but he knows that I won’t abandon my child, that I can’t abandon my
child, that there could be no life for me without my child, even with
him whom I love; but that if I abandoned my child and ran away from
him, I should be acting like the most infamous, basest of women. He
knows that, and knows that I am incapable of doing that.”

She recalled another sentence in the letter. “Our life must go on as it
has done in the past....” “That life was miserable enough in the old
days; it has been awful of late. What will it be now? And he knows all
that; he knows that I can’t repent that I breathe, that I love; he
knows that it can lead to nothing but lying and deceit; but he wants to
go on torturing me. I know him; I know that he’s at home and is happy
in deceit, like a fish swimming in the water. No, I won’t give him that
happiness. I’ll break through the spiderweb of lies in which he wants
to catch me, come what may. Anything’s better than lying and deceit.”

“But how? My God! my God! Was ever a woman so miserable as I am?...”

“No; I will break through it, I will break through it!” she cried,
jumping up and keeping back her tears. And she went to the
writing-table to write him another letter. But at the bottom of her
heart she felt that she was not strong enough to break through
anything, that she was not strong enough to get out of her old
position, however false and dishonorable it might be.

She sat down at the writing-table, but instead of writing she clasped
her hands on the table, and, laying her head on them, burst into tears,
with sobs and heaving breast like a child crying. She was weeping that
her dream of her position being made clear and definite had been
annihilated forever. She knew beforehand that everything would go on in
the old way, and far worse, indeed, than in the old way. She felt that
the position in the world that she enjoyed, and that had seemed to her
of so little consequence in the morning, that this position was
precious to her, that she would not have the strength to exchange it
for the shameful position of a woman who has abandoned husband and
child to join her lover; that however much she might struggle, she
could not be stronger than herself. She would never know freedom in
love, but would remain forever a guilty wife, with the menace of
detection hanging over her at every instant; deceiving her husband for
the sake of a shameful connection with a man living apart and away from
her, whose life she could never share. She knew that this was how it
would be, and at the same time it was so awful that she could not even
conceive what it would end in. And she cried without restraint, as
children cry when they are punished.

The sound of the footman’s steps forced her to rouse herself, and,
hiding her face from him, she pretended to be writing.

“The courier asks if there’s an answer,” the footman announced.

“An answer? Yes,” said Anna. “Let him wait. I’ll ring.”

“What can I write?” she thought. “What can I decide upon alone? What do
I know? What do I want? What is there I care for?” Again she felt that
her soul was beginning to be split in two. She was terrified again at
this feeling, and clutched at the first pretext for doing something
which might divert her thoughts from herself. “I ought to see Alexey”
(so she called Vronsky in her thoughts); “no one but he can tell me
what I ought to do. I’ll go to Betsy’s, perhaps I shall see him there,”
she said to herself, completely forgetting that when she had told him
the day before that she was not going to Princess Tverskaya’s, he had
said that in that case he should not go either. She went up to the
table, wrote to her husband, “I have received your letter.—A.”; and,
ringing the bell, gave it to the footman.

“We are not going,” she said to Annushka, as she came in.

“Not going at all?”

“No; don’t unpack till tomorrow, and let the carriage wait. I’m going
to the princess’s.”

“Which dress am I to get ready?”


Chapter 17

The croquet party to which the Princess Tverskaya had invited Anna was
to consist of two ladies and their adorers. These two ladies were the
chief representatives of a select new Petersburg circle, nicknamed, in
imitation of some imitation, _les sept merveilles du monde_. These
ladies belonged to a circle which, though of the highest society, was
utterly hostile to that in which Anna moved. Moreover, Stremov, one of
the most influential people in Petersburg, and the elderly admirer of
Liza Merkalova, was Alexey Alexandrovitch’s enemy in the political
world. From all these considerations Anna had not meant to go, and the
hints in Princess Tverskaya’s note referred to her refusal. But now
Anna was eager to go, in the hope of seeing Vronsky.

Anna arrived at Princess Tverskaya’s earlier than the other guests.

At the same moment as she entered, Vronsky’s footman, with
side-whiskers combed out like a _Kammerjunker_, went in too. He stopped
at the door, and, taking off his cap, let her pass. Anna recognized
him, and only then recalled that Vronsky had told her the day before
that he would not come. Most likely he was sending a note to say so.

As she took off her outer garment in the hall, she heard the footman,
pronouncing his “_r’s_” even like a _Kammerjunker_, say, “From the
count for the princess,” and hand the note.

She longed to question him as to where his master was. She longed to
turn back and send him a letter to come and see her, or to go herself
to see him. But neither the first nor the second nor the third course
was possible. Already she heard bells ringing to announce her arrival
ahead of her, and Princess Tverskaya’s footman was standing at the open
door waiting for her to go forward into the inner rooms.

“The princess is in the garden; they will inform her immediately. Would
you be pleased to walk into the garden?” announced another footman in
another room.

The position of uncertainty, of indecision, was still the same as at
home—worse, in fact, since it was impossible to take any step,
impossible to see Vronsky, and she had to remain here among outsiders,
in company so uncongenial to her present mood. But she was wearing a
dress that she knew suited her. She was not alone; all around was that
luxurious setting of idleness that she was used to, and she felt less
wretched than at home. She was not forced to think what she was to do.
Everything would be done of itself. On meeting Betsy coming towards her
in a white gown that struck her by its elegance, Anna smiled at her
just as she always did. Princess Tverskaya was walking with Tushkevitch
and a young lady, a relation, who, to the great joy of her parents in
the provinces, was spending the summer with the fashionable princess.

There was probably something unusual about Anna, for Betsy noticed it
at once.

“I slept badly,” answered Anna, looking intently at the footman who
came to meet them, and, as she supposed, brought Vronsky’s note.

“How glad I am you’ve come!” said Betsy. “I’m tired, and was just
longing to have some tea before they come. You might go”—she turned to
Tushkevitch—“with Masha, and try the croquet ground over there where
they’ve been cutting it. We shall have time to talk a little over tea;
we’ll have a cozy chat, eh?” she said in English to Anna, with a smile,
pressing the hand with which she held a parasol.

“Yes, especially as I can’t stay very long with you. I’m forced to go
on to old Madame Vrede. I’ve been promising to go for a century,” said
Anna, to whom lying, alien as it was to her nature, had become not
merely simple and natural in society, but a positive source of
satisfaction. Why she said this, which she had not thought of a second
before, she could not have explained. She had said it simply from the
reflection that as Vronsky would not be here, she had better secure her
own freedom, and try to see him somehow. But why she had spoken of old
Madame Vrede, whom she had to go and see, as she had to see many other
people, she could not have explained; and yet, as it afterwards turned
out, had she contrived the most cunning devices to meet Vronsky, she
could have thought of nothing better.

“No. I’m not going to let you go for anything,” answered Betsy, looking
intently into Anna’s face. “Really, if I were not fond of you, I should
feel offended. One would think you were afraid my society would
compromise you. Tea in the little dining-room, please,” she said, half
closing her eyes, as she always did when addressing the footman.

Taking the note from him, she read it.

“Alexey’s playing us false,” she said in French; “he writes that he
can’t come,” she added in a tone as simple and natural as though it
could never enter her head that Vronsky could mean anything more to
Anna than a game of croquet. Anna knew that Betsy knew everything, but,
hearing how she spoke of Vronsky before her, she almost felt persuaded
for a minute that she knew nothing.

“Ah!” said Anna indifferently, as though not greatly interested in the
matter, and she went on smiling: “How can you or your friends
compromise anyone?”

This playing with words, this hiding of a secret, had a great
fascination for Anna, as, indeed, it has for all women. And it was not
the necessity of concealment, not the aim with which the concealment
was contrived, but the process of concealment itself which attracted
her.

“I can’t be more Catholic than the Pope,” she said. “Stremov and Liza
Merkalova, why, they’re the cream of the cream of society. Besides,
they’re received everywhere, and _I_”—she laid special stress on the
I—“have never been strict and intolerant. It’s simply that I haven’t
the time.”

“No; you don’t care, perhaps, to meet Stremov? Let him and Alexey
Alexandrovitch tilt at each other in the committee—that’s no affair of
ours. But in the world, he’s the most amiable man I know, and a devoted
croquet player. You shall see. And, in spite of his absurd position as
Liza’s lovesick swain at his age, you ought to see how he carries off
the absurd position. He’s very nice. Sappho Shtoltz you don’t know? Oh,
that’s a new type, quite new.”

Betsy said all this, and, at the same time, from her good-humored,
shrewd glance, Anna felt that she partly guessed her plight, and was
hatching something for her benefit. They were in the little boudoir.

“I must write to Alexey though,” and Betsy sat down to the table,
scribbled a few lines, and put the note in an envelope.

“I’m telling him to come to dinner. I’ve one lady extra to dinner with
me, and no man to take her in. Look what I’ve said, will that persuade
him? Excuse me, I must leave you for a minute. Would you seal it up,
please, and send it off?” she said from the door; “I have to give some
directions.”

Without a moment’s thought, Anna sat down to the table with Betsy’s
letter, and, without reading it, wrote below: “It’s essential for me to
see you. Come to the Vrede garden. I shall be there at six o’clock.”
She sealed it up, and, Betsy coming back, in her presence handed the
note to be taken.

At tea, which was brought them on a little tea-table in the cool little
drawing-room, the cozy chat promised by Princess Tverskaya before the
arrival of her visitors really did come off between the two women. They
criticized the people they were expecting, and the conversation fell
upon Liza Merkalova.

“She’s very sweet, and I always liked her,” said Anna.

“You ought to like her. She raves about you. Yesterday she came up to
me after the races and was in despair at not finding you. She says
you’re a real heroine of romance, and that if she were a man she would
do all sorts of mad things for your sake. Stremov says she does that as
it is.”

“But do tell me, please, I never could make it out,” said Anna, after
being silent for some time, speaking in a tone that showed she was not
asking an idle question, but that what she was asking was of more
importance to her than it should have been; “do tell me, please, what
are her relations with Prince Kaluzhsky, Mishka, as he’s called? I’ve
met them so little. What does it mean?”

Betsy smiled with her eyes, and looked intently at Anna.

“It’s a new manner,” she said. “They’ve all adopted that manner.
They’ve flung their caps over the windmills. But there are ways and
ways of flinging them.”

“Yes, but what are her relations precisely with Kaluzhsky?”

Betsy broke into unexpectedly mirthful and irrepressible laughter, a
thing which rarely happened with her.

“You’re encroaching on Princess Myakaya’s special domain now. That’s
the question of an _enfant terrible_,” and Betsy obviously tried to
restrain herself, but could not, and went off into peals of that
infectious laughter that people laugh who do not laugh often. “You’d
better ask them,” she brought out, between tears of laughter.

“No; you laugh,” said Anna, laughing too in spite of herself, “but I
never could understand it. I can’t understand the husband’s rôle in
it.”

“The husband? Liza Merkalova’s husband carries her shawl, and is always
ready to be of use. But anything more than that in reality, no one
cares to inquire. You know in decent society one doesn’t talk or think
even of certain details of the toilet. That’s how it is with this.”

“Will you be at Madame Rolandak’s fête?” asked Anna, to change the
conversation.

“I don’t think so,” answered Betsy, and, without looking at her friend,
she began filling the little transparent cups with fragrant tea.
Putting a cup before Anna, she took out a cigarette, and, fitting it
into a silver holder, she lighted it.

“It’s like this, you see: I’m in a fortunate position,” she began,
quite serious now, as she took up her cup. “I understand you, and I
understand Liza. Liza now is one of those naïve natures that, like
children, don’t know what’s good and what’s bad. Anyway, she didn’t
comprehend it when she was very young. And now she’s aware that the
lack of comprehension suits her. Now, perhaps, she doesn’t know on
purpose,” said Betsy, with a subtle smile. “But, anyway, it suits her.
The very same thing, don’t you see, may be looked at tragically, and
turned into a misery, or it may be looked at simply and even
humorously. Possibly you are inclined to look at things too
tragically.”

“How I should like to know other people just as I know myself!” said
Anna, seriously and dreamily. “Am I worse than other people, or better?
I think I’m worse.”

“_Enfant terrible, enfant terrible!_” repeated Betsy. “But here they
are.”


Chapter 18

They heard the sound of steps and a man’s voice, then a woman’s voice
and laughter, and immediately thereafter there walked in the expected
guests: Sappho Shtoltz, and a young man beaming with excess of health,
the so-called Vaska. It was evident that ample supplies of beefsteak,
truffles, and Burgundy never failed to reach him at the fitting hour.
Vaska bowed to the two ladies, and glanced at them, but only for one
second. He walked after Sappho into the drawing-room, and followed her
about as though he were chained to her, keeping his sparkling eyes
fixed on her as though he wanted to eat her. Sappho Shtoltz was a
blonde beauty with black eyes. She walked with smart little steps in
high-heeled shoes, and shook hands with the ladies vigorously like a
man.

Anna had never met this new star of fashion, and was struck by her
beauty, the exaggerated extreme to which her dress was carried, and the
boldness of her manners. On her head there was such a superstructure of
soft, golden hair—her own and false mixed—that her head was equal in
size to the elegantly rounded bust, of which so much was exposed in
front. The impulsive abruptness of her movements was such that at every
step the lines of her knees and the upper part of her legs were
distinctly marked under her dress, and the question involuntarily rose
to the mind where in the undulating, piled-up mountain of material at
the back the real body of the woman, so small and slender, so naked in
front, and so hidden behind and below, really came to an end.

Betsy made haste to introduce her to Anna.

“Only fancy, we all but ran over two soldiers,” she began telling them
at once, using her eyes, smiling and twitching away her tail, which she
flung back at one stroke all on one side. “I drove here with Vaska....
Ah, to be sure, you don’t know each other.” And mentioning his surname
she introduced the young man, and reddening a little, broke into a
ringing laugh at her mistake—that is, at her having called him Vaska to
a stranger. Vaska bowed once more to Anna, but he said nothing to her.
He addressed Sappho: “You’ve lost your bet. We got here first. Pay up,”
said he, smiling.

Sappho laughed still more festively.

“Not just now,” said she.

“Oh, all right, I’ll have it later.”

“Very well, very well. Oh, yes.” She turned suddenly to Princess Betsy:
“I am a nice person ... I positively forgot it ... I’ve brought you a
visitor. And here he comes.” The unexpected young visitor, whom Sappho
had invited, and whom she had forgotten, was, however, a personage of
such consequence that, in spite of his youth, both the ladies rose on
his entrance.

He was a new admirer of Sappho’s. He now dogged her footsteps, like
Vaska.

Soon after Prince Kaluzhsky arrived, and Liza Merkalova with Stremov.
Liza Merkalova was a thin brunette, with an Oriental, languid type of
face, and—as everyone used to say—exquisite enigmatic eyes. The tone of
her dark dress (Anna immediately observed and appreciated the fact) was
in perfect harmony with her style of beauty. Liza was as soft and
enervated as Sappho was smart and abrupt.

But to Anna’s taste Liza was far more attractive. Betsy had said to
Anna that she had adopted the pose of an innocent child, but when Anna
saw her, she felt that this was not the truth. She really was both
innocent and corrupt, but a sweet and passive woman. It is true that
her tone was the same as Sappho’s; that like Sappho, she had two men,
one young and one old, tacked onto her, and devouring her with their
eyes. But there was something in her higher than what surrounded her.
There was in her the glow of the real diamond among glass imitations.
This glow shone out in her exquisite, truly enigmatic eyes. The weary,
and at the same time passionate, glance of those eyes, encircled by
dark rings, impressed one by its perfect sincerity. Everyone looking
into those eyes fancied he knew her wholly, and knowing her, could not
but love her. At the sight of Anna, her whole face lighted up at once
with a smile of delight.

“Ah, how glad I am to see you!” she said, going up to her. “Yesterday
at the races all I wanted was to get to you, but you’d gone away. I did
so want to see you, yesterday especially. Wasn’t it awful?” she said,
looking at Anna with eyes that seemed to lay bare all her soul.

“Yes; I had no idea it would be so thrilling,” said Anna, blushing.

The company got up at this moment to go into the garden.

“I’m not going,” said Liza, smiling and settling herself close to Anna.
“You won’t go either, will you? Who wants to play croquet?”

“Oh, I like it,” said Anna.

“There, how do you manage never to be bored by things? It’s delightful
to look at you. You’re alive, but I’m bored.”

“How can you be bored? Why, you live in the liveliest set in
Petersburg,” said Anna.

“Possibly the people who are not of our set are even more bored; but
we—I certainly—are not happy, but awfully, awfully bored.”

Sappho smoking a cigarette went off into the garden with the two young
men. Betsy and Stremov remained at the tea-table.

“What, bored!” said Betsy. “Sappho says they did enjoy themselves
tremendously at your house last night.”

“Ah, how dreary it all was!” said Liza Merkalova. “We all drove back to
my place after the races. And always the same people, always the same.
Always the same thing. We lounged about on sofas all the evening. What
is there to enjoy in that? No; do tell me how you manage never to be
bored?” she said, addressing Anna again. “One has but to look at you
and one sees, here’s a woman who may be happy or unhappy, but isn’t
bored. Tell me how you do it?”

“I do nothing,” answered Anna, blushing at these searching questions.

“That’s the best way,” Stremov put in. Stremov was a man of fifty,
partly gray, but still vigorous-looking, very ugly, but with a
characteristic and intelligent face. Liza Merkalova was his wife’s
niece, and he spent all his leisure hours with her. On meeting Anna
Karenina, as he was Alexey Alexandrovitch’s enemy in the government, he
tried, like a shrewd man and a man of the world, to be particularly
cordial with her, the wife of his enemy.

“‘Nothing,’” he put in with a subtle smile, “that’s the very best way.
I told you long ago,” he said, turning to Liza Merkalova, “that if you
don’t want to be bored, you mustn’t think you’re going to be bored.
It’s just as you mustn’t be afraid of not being able to fall asleep, if
you’re afraid of sleeplessness. That’s just what Anna Arkadyevna has
just said.”

“I should be very glad if I had said it, for it’s not only clever but
true,” said Anna, smiling.

“No, do tell me why it is one can’t go to sleep, and one can’t help
being bored?”

“To sleep well one ought to work, and to enjoy oneself one ought to
work too.”

“What am I to work for when my work is no use to anybody? And I can’t
and won’t knowingly make a pretense about it.”

“You’re incorrigible,” said Stremov, not looking at her, and he spoke
again to Anna. As he rarely met Anna, he could say nothing but
commonplaces to her, but he said those commonplaces as to when she was
returning to Petersburg, and how fond Countess Lidia Ivanovna was of
her, with an expression which suggested that he longed with his whole
soul to please her and show his regard for her and even more than that.

Tushkevitch came in, announcing that the party were awaiting the other
players to begin croquet.

“No, don’t go away, please don’t,” pleaded Liza Merkalova, hearing that
Anna was going. Stremov joined in her entreaties.

“It’s too violent a transition,” he said, “to go from such company to
old Madame Vrede. And besides, you will only give her a chance for
talking scandal, while here you arouse none but such different feelings
of the highest and most opposite kind,” he said to her.

Anna pondered for an instant in uncertainty. This shrewd man’s
flattering words, the naïve, childlike affection shown her by Liza
Merkalova, and all the social atmosphere she was used to,—it was all so
easy, and what was in store for her was so difficult, that she was for
a minute in uncertainty whether to remain, whether to put off a little
longer the painful moment of explanation. But remembering what was in
store for her alone at home, if she did not come to some decision,
remembering that gesture—terrible even in memory—when she had clutched
her hair in both hands—she said good-bye and went away.


Chapter 19

In spite of Vronsky’s apparently frivolous life in society, he was a
man who hated irregularity. In early youth in the Corps of Pages, he
had experienced the humiliation of a refusal, when he had tried, being
in difficulties, to borrow money, and since then he had never once put
himself in the same position again.

In order to keep his affairs in some sort of order, he used about five
times a year (more or less frequently, according to circumstances) to
shut himself up alone and put all his affairs into definite shape. This
he used to call his day of reckoning or _faire la lessive_.

On waking up the day after the races, Vronsky put on a white linen
coat, and without shaving or taking his bath, he distributed about the
table moneys, bills, and letters, and set to work. Petritsky, who knew
he was ill-tempered on such occasions, on waking up and seeing his
comrade at the writing-table, quietly dressed and went out without
getting in his way.

Every man who knows to the minutest details all the complexity of the
conditions surrounding him, cannot help imagining that the complexity
of these conditions, and the difficulty of making them clear, is
something exceptional and personal, peculiar to himself, and never
supposes that others are surrounded by just as complicated an array of
personal affairs as he is. So indeed it seemed to Vronsky. And not
without inward pride, and not without reason, he thought that any other
man would long ago have been in difficulties, would have been forced to
some dishonorable course, if he had found himself in such a difficult
position. But Vronsky felt that now especially it was essential for him
to clear up and define his position if he were to avoid getting into
difficulties.

What Vronsky attacked first as being the easiest was his pecuniary
position. Writing out on note paper in his minute hand all that he
owed, he added up the amount and found that his debts amounted to
seventeen thousand and some odd hundreds, which he left out for the
sake of clearness. Reckoning up his money and his bank book, he found
that he had left one thousand eight hundred roubles, and nothing coming
in before the New Year. Reckoning over again his list of debts, Vronsky
copied it, dividing it into three classes. In the first class he put
the debts which he would have to pay at once, or for which he must in
any case have the money ready so that on demand for payment there could
not be a moment’s delay in paying. Such debts amounted to about four
thousand: one thousand five hundred for a horse, and two thousand five
hundred as surety for a young comrade, Venovsky, who had lost that sum
to a cardsharper in Vronsky’s presence. Vronsky had wanted to pay the
money at the time (he had that amount then), but Venovsky and Yashvin
had insisted that they would pay and not Vronsky, who had not played.
That was so far well, but Vronsky knew that in this dirty business,
though his only share in it was undertaking by word of mouth to be
surety for Venovsky, it was absolutely necessary for him to have the
two thousand five hundred roubles so as to be able to fling it at the
swindler, and have no more words with him. And so for this first and
most important division he must have four thousand roubles. The second
class—eight thousand roubles—consisted of less important debts. These
were principally accounts owing in connection with his race horses, to
the purveyor of oats and hay, the English saddler, and so on. He would
have to pay some two thousand roubles on these debts too, in order to
be quite free from anxiety. The last class of debts—to shops, to
hotels, to his tailor—were such as need not be considered. So that he
needed at least six thousand roubles for current expenses, and he only
had one thousand eight hundred. For a man with one hundred thousand
roubles of revenue, which was what everyone fixed as Vronsky’s income,
such debts, one would suppose, could hardly be embarrassing; but the
fact was that he was far from having one hundred thousand. His father’s
immense property, which alone yielded a yearly income of two hundred
thousand, was left undivided between the brothers. At the time when the
elder brother, with a mass of debts, married Princess Varya Tchirkova,
the daughter of a Decembrist without any fortune whatever, Alexey had
given up to his elder brother almost the whole income from his father’s
estate, reserving for himself only twenty-five thousand a year from it.
Alexey had said at the time to his brother that that sum would be
sufficient for him until he married, which he probably never would do.
And his brother, who was in command of one of the most expensive
regiments, and was only just married, could not decline the gift. His
mother, who had her own separate property, had allowed Alexey every
year twenty thousand in addition to the twenty-five thousand he had
reserved, and Alexey had spent it all. Of late his mother, incensed
with him on account of his love affair and his leaving Moscow, had
given up sending him the money. And in consequence of this, Vronsky,
who had been in the habit of living on the scale of forty-five thousand
a year, having only received twenty thousand that year, found himself
now in difficulties. To get out of these difficulties, he could not
apply to his mother for money. Her last letter, which he had received
the day before, had particularly exasperated him by the hints in it
that she was quite ready to help him to succeed in the world and in the
army, but not to lead a life which was a scandal to all good society.
His mother’s attempt to buy him stung him to the quick and made him
feel colder than ever to her. But he could not draw back from the
generous word when it was once uttered, even though he felt now,
vaguely foreseeing certain eventualities in his intrigue with Madame
Karenina, that this generous word had been spoken thoughtlessly, and
that even though he were not married he might need all the hundred
thousand of income. But it was impossible to draw back. He had only to
recall his brother’s wife, to remember how that sweet, delightful Varya
sought, at every convenient opportunity, to remind him that she
remembered his generosity and appreciated it, to grasp the
impossibility of taking back his gift. It was as impossible as beating
a woman, stealing, or lying. One thing only could and ought to be done,
and Vronsky determined upon it without an instant’s hesitation: to
borrow money from a money-lender, ten thousand roubles, a proceeding
which presented no difficulty, to cut down his expenses generally, and
to sell his race horses. Resolving on this, he promptly wrote a note to
Rolandak, who had more than once sent to him with offers to buy horses
from him. Then he sent for the Englishman and the money-lender, and
divided what money he had according to the accounts he intended to pay.
Having finished this business, he wrote a cold and cutting answer to
his mother. Then he took out of his notebook three notes of Anna’s,
read them again, burned them, and remembering their conversation on the
previous day, he sank into meditation.


Chapter 20

Vronsky’s life was particularly happy in that he had a code of
principles, which defined with unfailing certitude what he ought and
what he ought not to do. This code of principles covered only a very
small circle of contingencies, but then the principles were never
doubtful, and Vronsky, as he never went outside that circle, had never
had a moment’s hesitation about doing what he ought to do. These
principles laid down as invariable rules: that one must pay a
cardsharper, but need not pay a tailor; that one must never tell a lie
to a man, but one may to a woman; that one must never cheat anyone, but
one may a husband; that one must never pardon an insult, but one may
give one and so on. These principles were possibly not reasonable and
not good, but they were of unfailing certainty, and so long as he
adhered to them, Vronsky felt that his heart was at peace and he could
hold his head up. Only quite lately in regard to his relations with
Anna, Vronsky had begun to feel that his code of principles did not
fully cover all possible contingencies, and to foresee in the future
difficulties and perplexities for which he could find no guiding clue.

His present relation to Anna and to her husband was to his mind clear
and simple. It was clearly and precisely defined in the code of
principles by which he was guided.

She was an honorable woman who had bestowed her love upon him, and he
loved her, and therefore she was in his eyes a woman who had a right to
the same, or even more, respect than a lawful wife. He would have had
his hand chopped off before he would have allowed himself by a word, by
a hint, to humiliate her, or even to fall short of the fullest respect
a woman could look for.

His attitude to society, too, was clear. Everyone might know, might
suspect it, but no one might dare to speak of it. If any did so, he was
ready to force all who might speak to be silent and to respect the
non-existent honor of the woman he loved.

His attitude to the husband was the clearest of all. From the moment
that Anna loved Vronsky, he had regarded his own right over her as the
one thing unassailable. Her husband was simply a superfluous and
tiresome person. No doubt he was in a pitiable position, but how could
that be helped? The one thing the husband had a right to was to demand
satisfaction with a weapon in his hand, and Vronsky was prepared for
this at any minute.

But of late new inner relations had arisen between him and her, which
frightened Vronsky by their indefiniteness. Only the day before she had
told him that she was with child. And he felt that this fact and what
she expected of him called for something not fully defined in that code
of principles by which he had hitherto steered his course in life. And
he had been indeed caught unawares, and at the first moment when she
spoke to him of her position, his heart had prompted him to beg her to
leave her husband. He had said that, but now thinking things over he
saw clearly that it would be better to manage to avoid that; and at the
same time, as he told himself so, he was afraid whether it was not
wrong.

“If I told her to leave her husband, that must mean uniting her life
with mine; am I prepared for that? How can I take her away now, when I
have no money? Supposing I could arrange.... But how can I take her
away while I’m in the service? If I say that—I ought to be prepared to
do it, that is, I ought to have the money and to retire from the army.”

And he grew thoughtful. The question whether to retire from the service
or not brought him to the other and perhaps the chief though hidden
interest of his life, of which none knew but he.

Ambition was the old dream of his youth and childhood, a dream which he
did not confess even to himself, though it was so strong that now this
passion was even doing battle with his love. His first steps in the
world and in the service had been successful, but two years before he
had made a great mistake. Anxious to show his independence and to
advance, he had refused a post that had been offered him, hoping that
this refusal would heighten his value; but it turned out that he had
been too bold, and he was passed over. And having, whether he liked or
not, taken up for himself the position of an independent man, he
carried it off with great tact and good sense, behaving as though he
bore no grudge against anyone, did not regard himself as injured in any
way, and cared for nothing but to be left alone since he was enjoying
himself. In reality he had ceased to enjoy himself as long ago as the
year before, when he went away to Moscow. He felt that this independent
attitude of a man who might have done anything, but cared to do
nothing, was already beginning to pall, that many people were beginning
to fancy that he was not really capable of anything but being a
straightforward, good-natured fellow. His connection with Madame
Karenina, by creating so much sensation and attracting general
attention, had given him a fresh distinction which soothed his gnawing
worm of ambition for a while, but a week before that worm had been
roused up again with fresh force. The friend of his childhood, a man of
the same set, of the same coterie, his comrade in the Corps of Pages,
Serpuhovskoy, who had left school with him and had been his rival in
class, in gymnastics, in their scrapes and their dreams of glory, had
come back a few days before from Central Asia, where he had gained two
steps up in rank, and an order rarely bestowed upon generals so young.

As soon as he arrived in Petersburg, people began to talk about him as
a newly risen star of the first magnitude. A schoolfellow of Vronsky’s
and of the same age, he was a general and was expecting a command,
which might have influence on the course of political events; while
Vronsky, independent and brilliant and beloved by a charming woman
though he was, was simply a cavalry captain who was readily allowed to
be as independent as ever he liked. “Of course I don’t envy
Serpuhovskoy and never could envy him; but his advancement shows me
that one has only to watch one’s opportunity, and the career of a man
like me may be very rapidly made. Three years ago he was in just the
same position as I am. If I retire, I burn my ships. If I remain in the
army, I lose nothing. She said herself she did not wish to change her
position. And with her love I cannot feel envious of Serpuhovskoy.” And
slowly twirling his mustaches, he got up from the table and walked
about the room. His eyes shone particularly brightly, and he felt in
that confident, calm, and happy frame of mind which always came after
he had thoroughly faced his position. Everything was straight and
clear, just as after former days of reckoning. He shaved, took a cold
bath, dressed and went out.


Chapter 21

“We’ve come to fetch you. Your _lessive_ lasted a good time today,”
said Petritsky. “Well, is it over?”

“It is over,” answered Vronsky, smiling with his eyes only, and
twirling the tips of his mustaches as circumspectly as though after the
perfect order into which his affairs had been brought any over-bold or
rapid movement might disturb it.

“You’re always just as if you’d come out of a bath after it,” said
Petritsky. “I’ve come from Gritsky’s” (that was what they called the
colonel); “they’re expecting you.”

Vronsky, without answering, looked at his comrade, thinking of
something else.

“Yes; is that music at his place?” he said, listening to the familiar
sounds of polkas and waltzes floating across to him. “What’s the fête?”

“Serpuhovskoy’s come.”

“Aha!” said Vronsky, “why, I didn’t know.”

The smile in his eyes gleamed more brightly than ever.

Having once made up his mind that he was happy in his love, that he
sacrificed his ambition to it—having anyway taken up this position,
Vronsky was incapable of feeling either envious of Serpuhovskoy or hurt
with him for not coming first to him when he came to the regiment.
Serpuhovskoy was a good friend, and he was delighted he had come.

“Ah, I’m very glad!”

The colonel, Demin, had taken a large country house. The whole party
were in the wide lower balcony. In the courtyard the first objects that
met Vronsky’s eyes were a band of singers in white linen coats,
standing near a barrel of vodka, and the robust, good-humored figure of
the colonel surrounded by officers. He had gone out as far as the first
step of the balcony and was loudly shouting across the band that played
Offenbach’s quadrille, waving his arms and giving some orders to a few
soldiers standing on one side. A group of soldiers, a quartermaster,
and several subalterns came up to the balcony with Vronsky. The colonel
returned to the table, went out again onto the steps with a tumbler in
his hand, and proposed the toast, “To the health of our former comrade,
the gallant general, Prince Serpuhovskoy. Hurrah!”

The colonel was followed by Serpuhovskoy, who came out onto the steps
smiling, with a glass in his hand.

“You always get younger, Bondarenko,” he said to the rosy-checked,
smart-looking quartermaster standing just before him, still youngish
looking though doing his second term of service.

It was three years since Vronsky had seen Serpuhovskoy. He looked more
robust, had let his whiskers grow, but was still the same graceful
creature, whose face and figure were even more striking from their
softness and nobility than their beauty. The only change Vronsky
detected in him was that subdued, continual radiance of beaming content
which settles on the faces of men who are successful and are sure of
the recognition of their success by everyone. Vronsky knew that radiant
air, and immediately observed it in Serpuhovskoy.

As Serpuhovskoy came down the steps he saw Vronsky. A smile of pleasure
lighted up his face. He tossed his head upwards and waved the glass in
his hand, greeting Vronsky, and showing him by the gesture that he
could not come to him before the quartermaster, who stood craning
forward his lips ready to be kissed.

“Here he is!” shouted the colonel. “Yashvin told me you were in one of
your gloomy tempers.”

Serpuhovskoy kissed the moist, fresh lips of the gallant-looking
quartermaster, and wiping his mouth with his handkerchief, went up to
Vronsky.

“How glad I am!” he said, squeezing his hand and drawing him on one
side.

“You look after him,” the colonel shouted to Yashvin, pointing to
Vronsky; and he went down below to the soldiers.

“Why weren’t you at the races yesterday? I expected to see you there,”
said Vronsky, scrutinizing Serpuhovskoy.

“I did go, but late. I beg your pardon,” he added, and he turned to the
adjutant: “Please have this divided from me, each man as much as it
runs to.” And he hurriedly took notes for three hundred roubles from
his pocketbook, blushing a little.

“Vronsky! Have anything to eat or drink?” asked Yashvin. “Hi, something
for the count to eat! Ah, here it is: have a glass!”

The fête at the colonel’s lasted a long while. There was a great deal
of drinking. They tossed Serpuhovskoy in the air and caught him again
several times. Then they did the same to the colonel. Then, to the
accompaniment of the band, the colonel himself danced with Petritsky.
Then the colonel, who began to show signs of feebleness, sat down on a
bench in the courtyard and began demonstrating to Yashvin the
superiority of Russia over Prussia, especially in cavalry attack, and
there was a lull in the revelry for a moment. Serpuhovskoy went into
the house to the bathroom to wash his hands and found Vronsky there;
Vronsky was drenching his head with water. He had taken off his coat
and put his sunburnt, hairy neck under the tap, and was rubbing it and
his head with his hands. When he had finished, Vronsky sat down by
Serpuhovskoy. They both sat down in the bathroom on a lounge, and a
conversation began which was very interesting to both of them.

“I’ve always been hearing about you through my wife,” said
Serpuhovskoy. “I’m glad you’ve been seeing her pretty often.”

“She’s friendly with Varya, and they’re the only women in Petersburg I
care about seeing,” answered Vronsky, smiling. He smiled because he
foresaw the topic the conversation would turn on, and he was glad of
it.

“The only ones?” Serpuhovskoy queried, smiling.

“Yes; and I heard news of you, but not only through your wife,” said
Vronsky, checking his hint by a stern expression of face. “I was
greatly delighted to hear of your success, but not a bit surprised. I
expected even more.”

Serpuhovskoy smiled. Such an opinion of him was obviously agreeable to
him, and he did not think it necessary to conceal it.

“Well, I on the contrary expected less—I’ll own frankly. But I’m glad,
very glad. I’m ambitious; that’s my weakness, and I confess to it.”

“Perhaps you wouldn’t confess to it if you hadn’t been successful,”
said Vronsky.

“I don’t suppose so,” said Serpuhovskoy, smiling again. “I won’t say
life wouldn’t be worth living without it, but it would be dull. Of
course I may be mistaken, but I fancy I have a certain capacity for the
line I’ve chosen, and that power of any sort in my hands, if it is to
be, will be better than in the hands of a good many people I know,”
said Serpuhovskoy, with beaming consciousness of success; “and so the
nearer I get to it, the better pleased I am.”

“Perhaps that is true for you, but not for everyone. I used to think so
too, but here I live and think life worth living not only for that.”

“There it’s out! here it comes!” said Serpuhovskoy, laughing. “Ever
since I heard about you, about your refusal, I began.... Of course, I
approved of what you did. But there are ways of doing everything. And I
think your action was good in itself, but you didn’t do it quite in the
way you ought to have done.”

“What’s done can’t be undone, and you know I never go back on what I’ve
done. And besides, I’m very well off.”

“Very well off—for the time. But you’re not satisfied with that. I
wouldn’t say this to your brother. He’s a nice child, like our host
here. There he goes!” he added, listening to the roar of “hurrah!”—“and
he’s happy, but that does not satisfy you.”

“I didn’t say it did satisfy me.”

“Yes, but that’s not the only thing. Such men as you are wanted.”

“By whom?”

“By whom? By society, by Russia. Russia needs men; she needs a party,
or else everything goes and will go to the dogs.”

“How do you mean? Bertenev’s party against the Russian communists?”

“No,” said Serpuhovskoy, frowning with vexation at being suspected of
such an absurdity. “_Tout ça est une blague_. That’s always been and
always will be. There are no communists. But intriguing people have to
invent a noxious, dangerous party. It’s an old trick. No, what’s wanted
is a powerful party of independent men like you and me.”

“But why so?” Vronsky mentioned a few men who were in power. “Why
aren’t they independent men?”

“Simply because they have not, or have not had from birth, an
independent fortune; they’ve not had a name, they’ve not been close to
the sun and center as we have. They can be bought either by money or by
favor. And they have to find a support for themselves in inventing a
policy. And they bring forward some notion, some policy that they don’t
believe in, that does harm; and the whole policy is really only a means
to a government house and so much income. _Cela n’est pas plus fin que
ça_, when you get a peep at their cards. I may be inferior to them,
stupider perhaps, though I don’t see why I should be inferior to them.
But you and I have one important advantage over them for certain, in
being more difficult to buy. And such men are more needed than ever.”

Vronsky listened attentively, but he was not so much interested by the
meaning of the words as by the attitude of Serpuhovskoy who was already
contemplating a struggle with the existing powers, and already had his
likes and dislikes in that higher world, while his own interest in the
governing world did not go beyond the interests of his regiment.
Vronsky felt, too, how powerful Serpuhovskoy might become through his
unmistakable faculty for thinking things out and for taking things in,
through his intelligence and gift of words, so rarely met with in the
world in which he moved. And, ashamed as he was of the feeling, he felt
envious.

“Still I haven’t the one thing of most importance for that,” he
answered; “I haven’t the desire for power. I had it once, but it’s
gone.”

“Excuse me, that’s not true,” said Serpuhovskoy, smiling.

“Yes, it is true, it is true ... now!” Vronsky added, to be truthful.

“Yes, it’s true now, that’s another thing; but that _now_ won’t last
forever.”

“Perhaps,” answered Vronsky.

“You say _perhaps_,” Serpuhovskoy went on, as though guessing his
thoughts, “but I say _for certain_. And that’s what I wanted to see you
for. Your action was just what it should have been. I see that, but you
ought not to keep it up. I only ask you to give me _carte blanche_. I’m
not going to offer you my protection ... though, indeed, why shouldn’t
I protect you?—you’ve protected me often enough! I should hope our
friendship rises above all that sort of thing. Yes,” he said, smiling
to him as tenderly as a woman, “give me _carte blanche_, retire from
the regiment, and I’ll draw you upwards imperceptibly.”

“But you must understand that I want nothing,” said Vronsky, “except
that all should be as it is.”

Serpuhovskoy got up and stood facing him.

“You say that all should be as it is. I understand what that means. But
listen: we’re the same age, you’ve known a greater number of women
perhaps than I have.” Serpohovskoy’s smile and gestures told Vronsky
that he mustn’t be afraid, that he would be tender and careful in
touching the sore place. “But I’m married, and believe me, in getting
to know thoroughly one’s wife, if one loves her, as someone has said,
one gets to know all women better than if one knew thousands of them.”

“We’re coming directly!” Vronsky shouted to an officer, who looked into
the room and called them to the colonel.

Vronsky was longing now to hear to the end and know what Serpuhovskey
would say to him.

“And here’s my opinion for you. Women are the chief stumbling block in
a man’s career. It’s hard to love a woman and do anything. There’s only
one way of having love conveniently without its being a
hindrance—that’s marriage. How, how am I to tell you what I mean?” said
Serpuhovskoy, who liked similes. “Wait a minute, wait a minute! Yes,
just as you can only carry a _fardeau_ and do something with your
hands, when the _fardeau_ is tied on your back, and that’s marriage.
And that’s what I felt when I was married. My hands were suddenly set
free. But to drag that _fardeau_ about with you without marriage, your
hands will always be so full that you can do nothing. Look at Mazankov,
at Krupov. They’ve ruined their careers for the sake of women.”

“What women!” said Vronsky, recalling the Frenchwoman and the actress
with whom the two men he had mentioned were connected.

“The firmer the woman’s footing in society, the worse it is. That’s
much the same as—not merely carrying the _fardeau_ in your arms—but
tearing it away from someone else.”

“You have never loved,” Vronsky said softly, looking straight before
him and thinking of Anna.

“Perhaps. But you remember what I’ve said to you. And another thing,
women are all more materialistic than men. We make something immense
out of love, but they are always _terre-à-terre_.”

“Directly, directly!” he cried to a footman who came in. But the
footman had not come to call them again, as he supposed. The footman
brought Vronsky a note.

“A man brought it from Princess Tverskaya.”

Vronsky opened the letter, and flushed crimson.

“My head’s begun to ache; I’m going home,” he said to Serpuhovskoy.

“Oh, good-bye then. You give me _carte blanche!_”

“We’ll talk about it later on; I’ll look you up in Petersburg.”


Chapter 22

It was six o’clock already, and so, in order to be there quickly, and
at the same time not to drive with his own horses, known to everyone,
Vronsky got into Yashvin’s hired fly, and told the driver to drive as
quickly as possible. It was a roomy, old-fashioned fly, with seats for
four. He sat in one corner, stretched his legs out on the front seat,
and sank into meditation.

A vague sense of the order into which his affairs had been brought, a
vague recollection of the friendliness and flattery of Serpuhovskoy,
who had considered him a man that was needed, and most of all, the
anticipation of the interview before him—all blended into a general,
joyous sense of life. This feeling was so strong that he could not help
smiling. He dropped his legs, crossed one leg over the other knee, and
taking it in his hand, felt the springy muscle of the calf, where it
had been grazed the day before by his fall, and leaning back he drew
several deep breaths.

“I’m happy, very happy!” he said to himself. He had often before had
this sense of physical joy in his own body, but he had never felt so
fond of himself, of his own body, as at that moment. He enjoyed the
slight ache in his strong leg, he enjoyed the muscular sensation of
movement in his chest as he breathed. The bright, cold August day,
which had made Anna feel so hopeless, seemed to him keenly stimulating,
and refreshed his face and neck that still tingled from the cold water.
The scent of brilliantine on his whiskers struck him as particularly
pleasant in the fresh air. Everything he saw from the carriage window,
everything in that cold pure air, in the pale light of the sunset, was
as fresh, and gay, and strong as he was himself: the roofs of the
houses shining in the rays of the setting sun, the sharp outlines of
fences and angles of buildings, the figures of passers-by, the
carriages that met him now and then, the motionless green of the trees
and grass, the fields with evenly drawn furrows of potatoes, and the
slanting shadows that fell from the houses, and trees, and bushes, and
even from the rows of potatoes—everything was bright like a pretty
landscape just finished and freshly varnished.

“Get on, get on!” he said to the driver, putting his head out of the
window, and pulling a three-rouble note out of his pocket he handed it
to the man as he looked round. The driver’s hand fumbled with something
at the lamp, the whip cracked, and the carriage rolled rapidly along
the smooth highroad.

“I want nothing, nothing but this happiness,” he thought, staring at
the bone button of the bell in the space between the windows, and
picturing to himself Anna just as he had seen her last time. “And as I
go on, I love her more and more. Here’s the garden of the Vrede Villa.
Whereabouts will she be? Where? How? Why did she fix on this place to
meet me, and why does she write in Betsy’s letter?” he thought,
wondering now for the first time at it. But there was now no time for
wonder. He called to the driver to stop before reaching the avenue, and
opening the door, jumped out of the carriage as it was moving, and went
into the avenue that led up to the house. There was no one in the
avenue; but looking round to the right he caught sight of her. Her face
was hidden by a veil, but he drank in with glad eyes the special
movement in walking, peculiar to her alone, the slope of the shoulders,
and the setting of the head, and at once a sort of electric shock ran
all over him. With fresh force, he felt conscious of himself from the
springy motions of his legs to the movements of his lungs as he
breathed, and something set his lips twitching.

Joining him, she pressed his hand tightly.

“You’re not angry that I sent for you? I absolutely had to see you,”
she said; and the serious and set line of her lips, which he saw under
the veil, transformed his mood at once.

“I angry! But how have you come, where from?”

“Never mind,” she said, laying her hand on his, “come along, I must
talk to you.”

He saw that something had happened, and that the interview would not be
a joyous one. In her presence he had no will of his own: without
knowing the grounds of her distress, he already felt the same distress
unconsciously passing over him.

“What is it? what?” he asked her, squeezing her hand with his elbow,
and trying to read her thoughts in her face.

She walked on a few steps in silence, gathering up her courage; then
suddenly she stopped.

“I did not tell you yesterday,” she began, breathing quickly and
painfully, “that coming home with Alexey Alexandrovitch I told him
everything ... told him I could not be his wife, that ... and told him
everything.”

He heard her, unconsciously bending his whole figure down to her as
though hoping in this way to soften the hardness of her position for
her. But directly she had said this he suddenly drew himself up, and a
proud and hard expression came over his face.

“Yes, yes, that’s better, a thousand times better! I know how painful
it was,” he said. But she was not listening to his words, she was
reading his thoughts from the expression of his face. She could not
guess that that expression arose from the first idea that presented
itself to Vronsky—that a duel was now inevitable. The idea of a duel
had never crossed her mind, and so she put a different interpretation
on this passing expression of hardness.

When she got her husband’s letter, she knew then at the bottom of her
heart that everything would go on in the old way, that she would not
have the strength of will to forego her position, to abandon her son,
and to join her lover. The morning spent at Princess Tverskaya’s had
confirmed her still more in this. But this interview was still of the
utmost gravity for her. She hoped that this interview would transform
her position, and save her. If on hearing this news he were to say to
her resolutely, passionately, without an instant’s wavering: “Throw up
everything and come with me!” she would give up her son and go away
with him. But this news had not produced what she had expected in him;
he simply seemed as though he were resenting some affront.

“It was not in the least painful to me. It happened of itself,” she
said irritably; “and see....” she pulled her husband’s letter out of
her glove.

“I understand, I understand,” he interrupted her, taking the letter,
but not reading it, and trying to soothe her. “The one thing I longed
for, the one thing I prayed for, was to cut short this position, so as
to devote my life to your happiness.”

“Why do you tell me that?” she said. “Do you suppose I can doubt it? If
I doubted....”

“Who’s that coming?” said Vronsky suddenly, pointing to two ladies
walking towards them. “Perhaps they know us!” and he hurriedly turned
off, drawing her after him into a side path.

“Oh, I don’t care!” she said. Her lips were quivering. And he fancied
that her eyes looked with strange fury at him from under the veil. “I
tell you that’s not the point—I can’t doubt that; but see what he
writes to me. Read it.” She stood still again.

Again, just as at the first moment of hearing of her rupture with her
husband, Vronsky, on reading the letter, was unconsciously carried away
by the natural sensation aroused in him by his own relation to the
betrayed husband. Now while he held his letter in his hands, he could
not help picturing the challenge, which he would most likely find at
home today or tomorrow, and the duel itself, in which, with the same
cold and haughty expression that his face was assuming at this moment
he would await the injured husband’s shot, after having himself fired
into the air. And at that instant there flashed across his mind the
thought of what Serpuhovskoy had just said to him, and what he had
himself been thinking in the morning—that it was better not to bind
himself—and he knew that this thought he could not tell her.

Having read the letter, he raised his eyes to her, and there was no
determination in them. She saw at once that he had been thinking about
it before by himself. She knew that whatever he might say to her, he
would not say all he thought. And she knew that her last hope had
failed her. This was not what she had been reckoning on.

“You see the sort of man he is,” she said, with a shaking voice;
“he....”

“Forgive me, but I rejoice at it,” Vronsky interrupted. “For God’s
sake, let me finish!” he added, his eyes imploring her to give him time
to explain his words. “I rejoice, because things cannot, cannot
possibly remain as he supposes.”

“Why can’t they?” Anna said, restraining her tears, and obviously
attaching no sort of consequence to what he said. She felt that her
fate was sealed.

Vronsky meant that after the duel—inevitable, he thought—things could
not go on as before, but he said something different.

“It can’t go on. I hope that now you will leave him. I hope”—he was
confused, and reddened—“that you will let me arrange and plan our life.
Tomorrow....” he was beginning.

She did not let him go on.

“But my child!” she shrieked. “You see what he writes! I should have to
leave him, and I can’t and won’t do that.”

“But, for God’s sake, which is better?—leave your child, or keep up
this degrading position?”

“To whom is it degrading?”

“To all, and most of all to you.”

“You say degrading ... don’t say that. Those words have no meaning for
me,” she said in a shaking voice. She did not want him now to say what
was untrue. She had nothing left her but his love, and she wanted to
love him. “Don’t you understand that from the day I loved you
everything has changed for me? For me there is one thing, and one thing
only—your love. If that’s mine, I feel so exalted, so strong, that
nothing can be humiliating to me. I am proud of my position, because
... proud of being ... proud....” She could not say what she was proud
of. Tears of shame and despair choked her utterance. She stood still
and sobbed.

He felt, too, something swelling in his throat and twitching in his
nose, and for the first time in his life he felt on the point of
weeping. He could not have said exactly what it was touched him so. He
felt sorry for her, and he felt he could not help her, and with that he
knew that he was to blame for her wretchedness, and that he had done
something wrong.

“Is not a divorce possible?” he said feebly. She shook her head, not
answering. “Couldn’t you take your son, and still leave him?”

“Yes; but it all depends on him. Now I must go to him,” she said
shortly. Her presentiment that all would again go on in the old way had
not deceived her.

“On Tuesday I shall be in Petersburg, and everything can be settled.”

“Yes,” she said. “But don’t let us talk any more of it.”

Anna’s carriage, which she had sent away, and ordered to come back to
the little gate of the Vrede garden, drove up. Anna said good-bye to
Vronsky, and drove home.


Chapter 23

On Monday there was the usual sitting of the Commission of the 2nd of
June. Alexey Alexandrovitch walked into the hall where the sitting was
held, greeted the members and the president, as usual, and sat down in
his place, putting his hand on the papers laid ready before him. Among
these papers lay the necessary evidence and a rough outline of the
speech he intended to make. But he did not really need these documents.
He remembered every point, and did not think it necessary to go over in
his memory what he would say. He knew that when the time came, and when
he saw his enemy facing him, and studiously endeavoring to assume an
expression of indifference, his speech would flow of itself better than
he could prepare it now. He felt that the import of his speech was of
such magnitude that every word of it would have weight. Meantime, as he
listened to the usual report, he had the most innocent and inoffensive
air. No one, looking at his white hands, with their swollen veins and
long fingers, so softly stroking the edges of the white paper that lay
before him, and at the air of weariness with which his head drooped on
one side, would have suspected that in a few minutes a torrent of words
would flow from his lips that would arouse a fearful storm, set the
members shouting and attacking one another, and force the president to
call for order. When the report was over, Alexey Alexandrovitch
announced in his subdued, delicate voice that he had several points to
bring before the meeting in regard to the Commission for the
Reorganization of the Native Tribes. All attention was turned upon him.
Alexey Alexandrovitch cleared his throat, and not looking at his
opponent, but selecting, as he always did while he was delivering his
speeches, the first person sitting opposite him, an inoffensive little
old man, who never had an opinion of any sort in the Commission, began
to expound his views. When he reached the point about the fundamental
and radical law, his opponent jumped up and began to protest. Stremov,
who was also a member of the Commission, and also stung to the quick,
began defending himself, and altogether a stormy sitting followed; but
Alexey Alexandrovitch triumphed, and his motion was carried, three new
commissions were appointed, and the next day in a certain Petersburg
circle nothing else was talked of but this sitting. Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s success had been even greater than he had anticipated.

Next morning, Tuesday, Alexey Alexandrovitch, on waking up, recollected
with pleasure his triumph of the previous day, and he could not help
smiling, though he tried to appear indifferent, when the chief
secretary of his department, anxious to flatter him, informed him of
the rumors that had reached him concerning what had happened in the
Commission.

Absorbed in business with the chief secretary, Alexey Alexandrovitch
had completely forgotten that it was Tuesday, the day fixed by him for
the return of Anna Arkadyevna, and he was surprised and received a
shock of annoyance when a servant came in to inform him of her arrival.

Anna had arrived in Petersburg early in the morning; the carriage had
been sent to meet her in accordance with her telegram, and so Alexey
Alexandrovitch might have known of her arrival. But when she arrived,
he did not meet her. She was told that he had not yet gone out, but was
busy with his secretary. She sent word to her husband that she had
come, went to her own room, and occupied herself in sorting out her
things, expecting he would come to her. But an hour passed; he did not
come. She went into the dining-room on the pretext of giving some
directions, and spoke loudly on purpose, expecting him to come out
there; but he did not come, though she heard him go to the door of his
study as he parted from the chief secretary. She knew that he usually
went out quickly to his office, and she wanted to see him before that,
so that their attitude to one another might be defined.

She walked across the drawing-room and went resolutely to him. When she
went into his study he was in official uniform, obviously ready to go
out, sitting at a little table on which he rested his elbows, looking
dejectedly before him. She saw him before he saw her, and she saw that
he was thinking of her.

On seeing her, he would have risen, but changed his mind, then his face
flushed hotly—a thing Anna had never seen before, and he got up quickly
and went to meet her, looking not at her eyes, but above them at her
forehead and hair. He went up to her, took her by the hand, and asked
her to sit down.

“I am very glad you have come,” he said, sitting down beside her, and
obviously wishing to say something, he stuttered. Several times he
tried to begin to speak, but stopped. In spite of the fact that,
preparing herself for meeting him, she had schooled herself to despise
and reproach him, she did not know what to say to him, and she felt
sorry for him. And so the silence lasted for some time. “Is Seryozha
quite well?” he said, and not waiting for an answer, he added: “I
shan’t be dining at home today, and I have got to go out directly.”

“I had thought of going to Moscow,” she said.

“No, you did quite, quite right to come,” he said, and was silent
again.

Seeing that he was powerless to begin the conversation, she began
herself.

“Alexey Alexandrovitch,” she said, looking at him and not dropping her
eyes under his persistent gaze at her hair, “I’m a guilty woman, I’m a
bad woman, but I am the same as I was, as I told you then, and I have
come to tell you that I can change nothing.”

“I have asked you no question about that,” he said, all at once,
resolutely and with hatred looking her straight in the face; “that was
as I had supposed.” Under the influence of anger he apparently regained
complete possession of all his faculties. “But as I told you then, and
have written to you,” he said in a thin, shrill voice, “I repeat now,
that I am not bound to know this. I ignore it. Not all wives are so
kind as you, to be in such a hurry to communicate such agreeable news
to their husbands.” He laid special emphasis on the word “agreeable.”
“I shall ignore it so long as the world knows nothing of it, so long as
my name is not disgraced. And so I simply inform you that our relations
must be just as they have always been, and that only in the event of
your compromising me I shall be obliged to take steps to secure my
honor.”

“But our relations cannot be the same as always,” Anna began in a timid
voice, looking at him with dismay.

When she saw once more those composed gestures, heard that shrill,
childish, and sarcastic voice, her aversion for him extinguished her
pity for him, and she felt only afraid, but at all costs she wanted to
make clear her position.

“I cannot be your wife while I....” she began.

He laughed a cold and malignant laugh.

“The manner of life you have chosen is reflected, I suppose, in your
ideas. I have too much respect or contempt, or both ... I respect your
past and despise your present ... that I was far from the
interpretation you put on my words.”

Anna sighed and bowed her head.

“Though indeed I fail to comprehend how, with the independence you
show,” he went on, getting hot, “—announcing your infidelity to your
husband and seeing nothing reprehensible in it, apparently—you can see
anything reprehensible in performing a wife’s duties in relation to
your husband.”

“Alexey Alexandrovitch! What is it you want of me?”

“I want you not to meet that man here, and to conduct yourself so that
neither the world nor the servants can reproach you ... not to see him.
That’s not much, I think. And in return you will enjoy all the
privileges of a faithful wife without fulfilling her duties. That’s all
I have to say to you. Now it’s time for me to go. I’m not dining at
home.” He got up and moved towards the door.

Anna got up too. Bowing in silence, he let her pass before him.


Chapter 24

The night spent by Levin on the haycock did not pass without result for
him. The way in which he had been managing his land revolted him and
had lost all attraction for him. In spite of the magnificent harvest,
never had there been, or, at least, never it seemed to him, had there
been so many hindrances and so many quarrels between him and the
peasants as that year, and the origin of these failures and this
hostility was now perfectly comprehensible to him. The delight he had
experienced in the work itself, and the consequent greater intimacy
with the peasants, the envy he felt of them, of their life, the desire
to adopt that life, which had been to him that night not a dream but an
intention, the execution of which he had thought out in detail—all this
had so transformed his view of the farming of the land as he had
managed it, that he could not take his former interest in it, and could
not help seeing that unpleasant relation between him and the workpeople
which was the foundation of it all. The herd of improved cows such as
Pava, the whole land ploughed over and enriched, the nine level fields
surrounded with hedges, the two hundred and forty acres heavily
manured, the seed sown in drills, and all the rest of it—it was all
splendid if only the work had been done for themselves, or for
themselves and comrades—people in sympathy with them. But he saw
clearly now (his work on a book of agriculture, in which the chief
element in husbandry was to have been the laborer, greatly assisted him
in this) that the sort of farming he was carrying on was nothing but a
cruel and stubborn struggle between him and the laborers, in which
there was on one side—his side—a continual intense effort to change
everything to a pattern he considered better; on the other side, the
natural order of things. And in this struggle he saw that with immense
expenditure of force on his side, and with no effort or even intention
on the other side, all that was attained was that the work did not go
to the liking of either side, and that splendid tools, splendid cattle
and land were spoiled with no good to anyone. Worst of all, the energy
expended on this work was not simply wasted. He could not help feeling
now, since the meaning of this system had become clear to him, that the
aim of his energy was a most unworthy one. In reality, what was the
struggle about? He was struggling for every farthing of his share (and
he could not help it, for he had only to relax his efforts, and he
would not have had the money to pay his laborers’ wages), while they
were only struggling to be able to do their work easily and agreeably,
that is to say, as they were used to doing it. It was for his interests
that every laborer should work as hard as possible, and that while
doing so he should keep his wits about him, so as to try not to break
the winnowing machines, the horse rakes, the thrashing machines, that
he should attend to what he was doing. What the laborer wanted was to
work as pleasantly as possible, with rests, and above all, carelessly
and heedlessly, without thinking. That summer Levin saw this at every
step. He sent the men to mow some clover for hay, picking out the worst
patches where the clover was overgrown with grass and weeds and of no
use for seed; again and again they mowed the best acres of clover,
justifying themselves by the pretense that the bailiff had told them
to, and trying to pacify him with the assurance that it would be
splendid hay; but he knew that it was owing to those acres being so
much easier to mow. He sent out a hay machine for pitching the hay—it
was broken at the first row because it was dull work for a peasant to
sit on the seat in front with the great wings waving above him. And he
was told, “Don’t trouble, your honor, sure, the womenfolks will pitch
it quick enough.” The ploughs were practically useless, because it
never occurred to the laborer to raise the share when he turned the
plough, and forcing it round, he strained the horses and tore up the
ground, and Levin was begged not to mind about it. The horses were
allowed to stray into the wheat because not a single laborer would
consent to be night-watchman, and in spite of orders to the contrary,
the laborers insisted on taking turns for night duty, and Ivan, after
working all day long, fell asleep, and was very penitent for his fault,
saying, “Do what you will to me, your honor.”

They killed three of the best calves by letting them into the clover
aftermath without care as to their drinking, and nothing would make the
men believe that they had been blown out by the clover, but they told
him, by way of consolation, that one of his neighbors had lost a
hundred and twelve head of cattle in three days. All this happened, not
because anyone felt ill-will to Levin or his farm; on the contrary, he
knew that they liked him, thought him a simple gentleman (their highest
praise); but it happened simply because all they wanted was to work
merrily and carelessly, and his interests were not only remote and
incomprehensible to them, but fatally opposed to their most just
claims. Long before, Levin had felt dissatisfaction with his own
position in regard to the land. He saw where his boat leaked, but he
did not look for the leak, perhaps purposely deceiving himself.
(Nothing would be left him if he lost faith in it.) But now he could
deceive himself no longer. The farming of the land, as he was managing
it, had become not merely unattractive but revolting to him, and he
could take no further interest in it.

To this now was joined the presence, only twenty-five miles off, of
Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, whom he longed to see and could not see. Darya
Alexandrovna Oblonskaya had invited him, when he was over there, to
come; to come with the object of renewing his offer to her sister, who
would, so she gave him to understand, accept him now. Levin himself had
felt on seeing Kitty Shtcherbatskaya that he had never ceased to love
her; but he could not go over to the Oblonskys’, knowing she was there.
The fact that he had made her an offer, and she had refused him, had
placed an insuperable barrier between her and him. “I can’t ask her to
be my wife merely because she can’t be the wife of the man she wanted
to marry,” he said to himself. The thought of this made him cold and
hostile to her. “I should not be able to speak to her without a feeling
of reproach; I could not look at her without resentment; and she will
only hate me all the more, as she’s bound to. And besides, how can I
now, after what Darya Alexandrovna told me, go to see them? Can I help
showing that I know what she told me? And me to go magnanimously to
forgive her, and have pity on her! Me go through a performance before
her of forgiving, and deigning to bestow my love on her!... What
induced Darya Alexandrovna to tell me that? By chance I might have seen
her, then everything would have happened of itself; but, as it is, it’s
out of the question, out of the question!”

Darya Alexandrovna sent him a letter, asking him for a side-saddle for
Kitty’s use. “I’m told you have a side-saddle,” she wrote to him; “I
hope you will bring it over yourself.”

This was more than he could stand. How could a woman of any
intelligence, of any delicacy, put her sister in such a humiliating
position! He wrote ten notes, and tore them all up, and sent the saddle
without any reply. To write that he would go was impossible, because he
could not go; to write that he could not come because something
prevented him, or that he would be away, that was still worse. He sent
the saddle without an answer, and with a sense of having done something
shameful; he handed over all the now revolting business of the estate
to the bailiff, and set off next day to a remote district to see his
friend Sviazhsky, who had splendid marshes for grouse in his
neighborhood, and had lately written to ask him to keep a long-standing
promise to stay with him. The grouse-marsh, in the Surovsky district,
had long tempted Levin, but he had continually put off this visit on
account of his work on the estate. Now he was glad to get away from the
neighborhood of the Shtcherbatskys, and still more from his farm work,
especially on a shooting expedition, which always in trouble served as
the best consolation.


Chapter 25

In the Surovsky district there was no railway nor service of post
horses, and Levin drove there with his own horses in his big,
old-fashioned carriage.

He stopped halfway at a well-to-do peasant’s to feed his horses. A
bald, well-preserved old man, with a broad, red beard, gray on his
cheeks, opened the gate, squeezing against the gatepost to let the
three horses pass. Directing the coachman to a place under the shed in
the big, clean, tidy yard, with charred, old-fashioned ploughs in it,
the old man asked Levin to come into the parlor. A cleanly dressed
young woman, with clogs on her bare feet, was scrubbing the floor in
the new outer room. She was frightened of the dog, that ran in after
Levin, and uttered a shriek, but began laughing at her own fright at
once when she was told the dog would not hurt her. Pointing Levin with
her bare arm to the door into the parlor, she bent down again, hiding
her handsome face, and went on scrubbing.

“Would you like the samovar?” she asked.

“Yes, please.”

The parlor was a big room, with a Dutch stove, and a screen dividing it
into two. Under the holy pictures stood a table painted in patterns, a
bench, and two chairs. Near the entrance was a dresser full of
crockery. The shutters were closed, there were few flies, and it was so
clean that Levin was anxious that Laska, who had been running along the
road and bathing in puddles, should not muddy the floor, and ordered
her to a place in the corner by the door. After looking round the
parlor, Levin went out in the back yard. The good-looking young woman
in clogs, swinging the empty pails on the yoke, ran on before him to
the well for water.

“Look sharp, my girl!” the old man shouted after her, good-humoredly,
and he went up to Levin. “Well, sir, are you going to Nikolay
Ivanovitch Sviazhsky? His honor comes to us too,” he began, chatting,
leaning his elbows on the railing of the steps. In the middle of the
old man’s account of his acquaintance with Sviazhsky, the gates creaked
again, and laborers came into the yard from the fields, with wooden
ploughs and harrows. The horses harnessed to the ploughs and harrows
were sleek and fat. The laborers were obviously of the household: two
were young men in cotton shirts and caps, the two others were hired
laborers in homespun shirts, one an old man, the other a young fellow.
Moving off from the steps, the old man went up to the horses and began
unharnessing them.

“What have they been ploughing?” asked Levin.

“Ploughing up the potatoes. We rent a bit of land too. Fedot, don’t let
out the gelding, but take it to the trough, and we’ll put the other in
harness.”

“Oh, father, the ploughshares I ordered, has he brought them along?”
asked the big, healthy-looking fellow, obviously the old man’s son.

“There ... in the outer room,” answered the old man, bundling together
the harness he had taken off, and flinging it on the ground. “You can
put them on, while they have dinner.”

The good-looking young woman came into the outer room with the full
pails dragging at her shoulders. More women came on the scene from
somewhere, young and handsome, middle-aged, old and ugly, with children
and without children.

The samovar was beginning to sing; the laborers and the family, having
disposed of the horses, came in to dinner. Levin, getting his
provisions out of his carriage, invited the old man to take tea with
him.

“Well, I have had some today already,” said the old man, obviously
accepting the invitation with pleasure. “But just a glass for company.”

Over their tea Levin heard all about the old man’s farming. Ten years
before, the old man had rented three hundred acres from the lady who
owned them, and a year ago he had bought them and rented another three
hundred from a neighboring landowner. A small part of the land—the
worst part—he let out for rent, while a hundred acres of arable land he
cultivated himself with his family and two hired laborers. The old man
complained that things were doing badly. But Levin saw that he simply
did so from a feeling of propriety, and that his farm was in a
flourishing condition. If it had been unsuccessful he would not have
bought land at thirty-five roubles the acre, he would not have married
his three sons and a nephew, he would not have rebuilt twice after
fires, and each time on a larger scale. In spite of the old man’s
complaints, it was evident that he was proud, and justly proud, of his
prosperity, proud of his sons, his nephew, his sons’ wives, his horses
and his cows, and especially of the fact that he was keeping all this
farming going. From his conversation with the old man, Levin thought he
was not averse to new methods either. He had planted a great many
potatoes, and his potatoes, as Levin had seen driving past, were
already past flowering and beginning to die down, while Levin’s were
only just coming into flower. He earthed up his potatoes with a modern
plough borrowed from a neighboring landowner. He sowed wheat. The
trifling fact that, thinning out his rye, the old man used the rye he
thinned out for his horses, specially struck Levin. How many times had
Levin seen this splendid fodder wasted, and tried to get it saved; but
always it had turned out to be impossible. The peasant got this done,
and he could not say enough in praise of it as food for the beasts.

“What have the wenches to do? They carry it out in bundles to the
roadside, and the cart brings it away.”

“Well, we landowners can’t manage well with our laborers,” said Levin,
handing him a glass of tea.

“Thank you,” said the old man, and he took the glass, but refused
sugar, pointing to a lump he had left. “They’re simple destruction,”
said he. “Look at Sviazhsky’s, for instance. We know what the land’s
like—first-rate, yet there’s not much of a crop to boast of. It’s not
looked after enough—that’s all it is!”

“But you work your land with hired laborers?”

“We’re all peasants together. We go into everything ourselves. If a
man’s no use, he can go, and we can manage by ourselves.”

“Father, Finogen wants some tar,” said the young woman in the clogs,
coming in.

“Yes, yes, that’s how it is, sir!” said the old man, getting up, and
crossing himself deliberately, he thanked Levin and went out.

When Levin went into the kitchen to call his coachman he saw the whole
family at dinner. The women were standing up waiting on them. The
young, sturdy-looking son was telling something funny with his mouth
full of pudding, and they were all laughing, the woman in the clogs,
who was pouring cabbage soup into a bowl, laughing most merrily of all.

Very probably the good-looking face of the young woman in the clogs had
a good deal to do with the impression of well-being this peasant
household made upon Levin, but the impression was so strong that Levin
could never get rid of it. And all the way from the old peasant’s to
Sviazhsky’s he kept recalling this peasant farm as though there were
something in this impression that demanded his special attention.


Chapter 26

Sviazhsky was the marshal of his district. He was five years older than
Levin, and had long been married. His sister-in-law, a young girl Levin
liked very much, lived in his house; and Levin knew that Sviazhsky and
his wife would have greatly liked to marry the girl to him. He knew
this with certainty, as so-called eligible young men always know it,
though he could never have brought himself to speak of it to anyone;
and he knew too that, although he wanted to get married, and although
by every token this very attractive girl would make an excellent wife,
he could no more have married her, even if he had not been in love with
Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, than he could have flown up to the sky. And this
knowledge poisoned the pleasure he had hoped to find in the visit to
Sviazhsky.

On getting Sviazhsky’s letter with the invitation for shooting, Levin
had immediately thought of this; but in spite of it he had made up his
mind that Sviazhsky’s having such views for him was simply his own
groundless supposition, and so he would go, all the same. Besides, at
the bottom of his heart he had a desire to try himself, put himself to
the test in regard to this girl. The Sviazhskys’ home-life was
exceedingly pleasant, and Sviazhsky himself, the best type of man
taking part in local affairs that Levin knew, was very interesting to
him.

Sviazhsky was one of those people, always a source of wonder to Levin,
whose convictions, very logical though never original, go one way by
themselves, while their life, exceedingly definite and firm in its
direction, goes its way quite apart and almost always in direct
contradiction to their convictions. Sviazhsky was an extremely advanced
man. He despised the nobility, and believed the mass of the nobility to
be secretly in favor of serfdom, and only concealing their views from
cowardice. He regarded Russia as a ruined country, rather after the
style of Turkey, and the government of Russia as so bad that he never
permitted himself to criticize its doings seriously, and yet he was a
functionary of that government and a model marshal of nobility, and
when he drove about he always wore the cockade of office and the cap
with the red band. He considered human life only tolerable abroad, and
went abroad to stay at every opportunity, and at the same time he
carried on a complex and improved system of agriculture in Russia, and
with extreme interest followed everything and knew everything that was
being done in Russia. He considered the Russian peasant as occupying a
stage of development intermediate between the ape and the man, and at
the same time in the local assemblies no one was readier to shake hands
with the peasants and listen to their opinion. He believed neither in
God nor the devil, but was much concerned about the question of the
improvement of the clergy and the maintenance of their revenues, and
took special trouble to keep up the church in his village.

On the woman question he was on the side of the extreme advocates of
complete liberty for women, and especially their right to labor. But he
lived with his wife on such terms that their affectionate childless
home life was the admiration of everyone, and arranged his wife’s life
so that she did nothing and could do nothing but share her husband’s
efforts that her time should pass as happily and as agreeably as
possible.

If it had not been a characteristic of Levin’s to put the most
favorable interpretation on people, Sviazhsky’s character would have
presented no doubt or difficulty to him: he would have said to himself,
“a fool or a knave,” and everything would have seemed clear. But he
could not say “a fool,” because Sviazhsky was unmistakably clever, and
moreover, a highly cultivated man, who was exceptionally modest over
his culture. There was not a subject he knew nothing of. But he did not
display his knowledge except when he was compelled to do so. Still less
could Levin say that he was a knave, as Sviazhsky was unmistakably an
honest, good-hearted, sensible man, who worked good-humoredly, keenly,
and perseveringly at his work; he was held in high honor by everyone
about him, and certainly he had never consciously done, and was indeed
incapable of doing, anything base.

Levin tried to understand him, and could not understand him, and looked
at him and his life as at a living enigma.

Levin and he were very friendly, and so Levin used to venture to sound
Sviazhsky, to try to get at the very foundation of his view of life;
but it was always in vain. Every time Levin tried to penetrate beyond
the outer chambers of Sviazhsky’s mind, which were hospitably open to
all, he noticed that Sviazhsky was slightly disconcerted; faint signs
of alarm were visible in his eyes, as though he were afraid Levin would
understand him, and he would give him a kindly, good-humored repulse.

Just now, since his disenchantment with farming, Levin was particularly
glad to stay with Sviazhsky. Apart from the fact that the sight of this
happy and affectionate couple, so pleased with themselves and everyone
else, and their well-ordered home had always a cheering effect on
Levin, he felt a longing, now that he was so dissatisfied with his own
life, to get at that secret in Sviazhsky that gave him such clearness,
definiteness, and good courage in life. Moreover, Levin knew that at
Sviazhsky’s he should meet the landowners of the neighborhood, and it
was particularly interesting for him just now to hear and take part in
those rural conversations concerning crops, laborers’ wages, and so on,
which, he was aware, are conventionally regarded as something very low,
but which seemed to him just now to constitute the one subject of
importance. “It was not, perhaps, of importance in the days of serfdom,
and it may not be of importance in England. In both cases the
conditions of agriculture are firmly established; but among us now,
when everything has been turned upside down and is only just taking
shape, the question what form these conditions will take is the one
question of importance in Russia,” thought Levin.

The shooting turned out to be worse than Levin had expected. The marsh
was dry and there were no grouse at all. He walked about the whole day
and only brought back three birds, but to make up for that—he brought
back, as he always did from shooting, an excellent appetite, excellent
spirits, and that keen, intellectual mood which with him always
accompanied violent physical exertion. And while out shooting, when he
seemed to be thinking of nothing at all, suddenly the old man and his
family kept coming back to his mind, and the impression of them seemed
to claim not merely his attention, but the solution of some question
connected with them.

In the evening at tea, two landowners who had come about some business
connected with a wardship were of the party, and the interesting
conversation Levin had been looking forward to sprang up.

Levin was sitting beside his hostess at the tea table, and was obliged
to keep up a conversation with her and her sister, who was sitting
opposite him. Madame Sviazhskaya was a round-faced, fair-haired, rather
short woman, all smiles and dimples. Levin tried through her to get a
solution of the weighty enigma her husband presented to his mind; but
he had not complete freedom of ideas, because he was in an agony of
embarrassment. This agony of embarrassment was due to the fact that the
sister-in-law was sitting opposite to him, in a dress, specially put
on, as he fancied, for his benefit, cut particularly open, in the shape
of a trapeze, on her white bosom. This quadrangular opening, in spite
of the bosom’s being very white, or just because it was very white,
deprived Levin of the full use of his faculties. He imagined, probably
mistakenly, that this low-necked bodice had been made on his account,
and felt that he had no right to look at it, and tried not to look at
it; but he felt that he was to blame for the very fact of the
low-necked bodice having been made. It seemed to Levin that he had
deceived someone, that he ought to explain something, but that to
explain it was impossible, and for that reason he was continually
blushing, was ill at ease and awkward. His awkwardness infected the
pretty sister-in-law too. But their hostess appeared not to observe
this, and kept purposely drawing her into the conversation.

“You say,” she said, pursuing the subject that had been started, “that
my husband cannot be interested in what’s Russian. It’s quite the
contrary; he is always in cheerful spirits abroad, but not as he is
here. Here, he feels in his proper place. He has so much to do, and he
has the faculty of interesting himself in everything. Oh, you’ve not
been to see our school, have you?”

“I’ve seen it.... The little house covered with ivy, isn’t it?”

“Yes; that’s Nastia’s work,” she said, indicating her sister.

“You teach in it yourself?” asked Levin, trying to look above the open
neck, but feeling that wherever he looked in that direction he should
see it.

“Yes; I used to teach in it myself, and do teach still, but we have a
first-rate schoolmistress now. And we’ve started gymnastic exercises.”

“No, thank you, I won’t have any more tea,” said Levin, and conscious
of doing a rude thing, but incapable of continuing the conversation, he
got up, blushing. “I hear a very interesting conversation,” he added,
and walked to the other end of the table, where Sviazhsky was sitting
with the two gentlemen of the neighborhood. Sviazhsky was sitting
sideways, with one elbow on the table, and a cup in one hand, while
with the other hand he gathered up his beard, held it to his nose and
let it drop again, as though he were smelling it. His brilliant black
eyes were looking straight at the excited country gentleman with gray
whiskers, and apparently he derived amusement from his remarks. The
gentleman was complaining of the peasants. It was evident to Levin that
Sviazhsky knew an answer to this gentleman’s complaints, which would at
once demolish his whole contention, but that in his position he could
not give utterance to this answer, and listened, not without pleasure,
to the landowner’s comic speeches.

The gentleman with the gray whiskers was obviously an inveterate
adherent of serfdom and a devoted agriculturist, who had lived all his
life in the country. Levin saw proofs of this in his dress, in the
old-fashioned threadbare coat, obviously not his everyday attire, in
his shrewd, deep-set eyes, in his idiomatic, fluent Russian, in the
imperious tone that had become habitual from long use, and in the
resolute gestures of his large, red, sunburnt hands, with an old
betrothal ring on the little finger.


Chapter 27

“If I’d only the heart to throw up what’s been set going ... such a lot
of trouble wasted ... I’d turn my back on the whole business, sell up,
go off like Nikolay Ivanovitch ... to hear _La Belle Hélène_,” said the
landowner, a pleasant smile lighting up his shrewd old face.

“But you see you don’t throw it up,” said Nikolay Ivanovitch Sviazhsky;
“so there must be something gained.”

“The only gain is that I live in my own house, neither bought nor
hired. Besides, one keeps hoping the people will learn sense. Though,
instead of that, you’d never believe it—the drunkenness, the
immorality! They keep chopping and changing their bits of land. Not a
sight of a horse or a cow. The peasant’s dying of hunger, but just go
and take him on as a laborer, he’ll do his best to do you a mischief,
and then bring you up before the justice of the peace.”

“But then you make complaints to the justice too,” said Sviazhsky.

“I lodge complaints? Not for anything in the world! Such a talking, and
such a to-do, that one would have cause to regret it. At the works, for
instance, they pocketed the advance-money and made off. What did the
justice do? Why, acquitted them. Nothing keeps them in order but their
own communal court and their village elder. He’ll flog them in the good
old style! But for that there’d be nothing for it but to give it all up
and run away.”

Obviously the landowner was chaffing Sviazhsky, who, far from resenting
it, was apparently amused by it.

“But you see we manage our land without such extreme measures,” said
he, smiling: “Levin and I and this gentleman.”

He indicated the other landowner.

“Yes, the thing’s done at Mihail Petrovitch’s, but ask him how it’s
done. Do you call that a rational system?” said the landowner,
obviously rather proud of the word “rational.”

“My system’s very simple,” said Mihail Petrovitch, “thank God. All my
management rests on getting the money ready for the autumn taxes, and
the peasants come to me, ‘Father, master, help us!’ Well, the peasants
are all one’s neighbors; one feels for them. So one advances them a
third, but one says: ‘Remember, lads, I have helped you, and you must
help me when I need it—whether it’s the sowing of the oats, or the
haycutting, or the harvest’; and well, one agrees, so much for each
taxpayer—though there are dishonest ones among them too, it’s true.”

Levin, who had long been familiar with these patriarchal methods,
exchanged glances with Sviazhsky and interrupted Mihail Petrovitch,
turning again to the gentleman with the gray whiskers.

“Then what do you think?” he asked; “what system is one to adopt
nowadays?”

“Why, manage like Mihail Petrovitch, or let the land for half the crop
or for rent to the peasants; that one can do—only that’s just how the
general prosperity of the country is being ruined. Where the land with
serf-labor and good management gave a yield of nine to one, on the
half-crop system it yields three to one. Russia has been ruined by the
emancipation!”

Sviazhsky looked with smiling eyes at Levin, and even made a faint
gesture of irony to him; but Levin did not think the landowner’s words
absurd, he understood them better than he did Sviazhsky. A great deal
more of what the gentleman with the gray whiskers said to show in what
way Russia was ruined by the emancipation struck him indeed as very
true, new to him, and quite incontestable. The landowner unmistakably
spoke his own individual thought—a thing that very rarely happens—and a
thought to which he had been brought not by a desire of finding some
exercise for an idle brain, but a thought which had grown up out of the
conditions of his life, which he had brooded over in the solitude of
his village, and had considered in every aspect.

“The point is, don’t you see, that progress of every sort is only made
by the use of authority,” he said, evidently wishing to show he was not
without culture. “Take the reforms of Peter, of Catherine, of
Alexander. Take European history. And progress in agriculture more than
anything else—the potato, for instance, that was introduced among us by
force. The wooden plough too wasn’t always used. It was introduced
maybe in the days before the Empire, but it was probably brought in by
force. Now, in our own day, we landowners in the serf times used
various improvements in our husbandry: drying machines and thrashing
machines, and carting manure and all the modern implements—all that we
brought into use by our authority, and the peasants opposed it at
first, and ended by imitating us. Now, by the abolition of serfdom we
have been deprived of our authority; and so our husbandry, where it had
been raised to a high level, is bound to sink to the most savage
primitive condition. That’s how I see it.”

“But why so? If it’s rational, you’ll be able to keep up the same
system with hired labor,” said Sviazhsky.

“We’ve no power over them. With whom am I going to work the system,
allow me to ask?”

“There it is—the labor force—the chief element in agriculture,” thought
Levin.

“With laborers.”

“The laborers won’t work well, and won’t work with good implements. Our
laborer can do nothing but get drunk like a pig, and when he’s drunk he
ruins everything you give him. He makes the horses ill with too much
water, cuts good harness, barters the tires of the wheels for drink,
drops bits of iron into the thrashing machine, so as to break it. He
loathes the sight of anything that’s not after his fashion. And that’s
how it is the whole level of husbandry has fallen. Lands gone out of
cultivation, overgrown with weeds, or divided among the peasants, and
where millions of bushels were raised you get a hundred thousand; the
wealth of the country has decreased. If the same thing had been done,
but with care that....”

And he proceeded to unfold his own scheme of emancipation by means of
which these drawbacks might have been avoided.

This did not interest Levin, but when he had finished, Levin went back
to his first position, and, addressing Sviazhsky, and trying to draw
him into expressing his serious opinion:—

“That the standard of culture is falling, and that with our present
relations to the peasants there is no possibility of farming on a
rational system to yield a profit—that’s perfectly true,” said he.

“I don’t believe it,” Sviazhsky replied quite seriously; “all I see is
that we don’t know how to cultivate the land, and that our system of
agriculture in the serf days was by no means too high, but too low. We
have no machines, no good stock, no efficient supervision; we don’t
even know how to keep accounts. Ask any landowner; he won’t be able to
tell you what crop’s profitable, and what’s not.”

“Italian bookkeeping,” said the gentleman of the gray whiskers
ironically. “You may keep your books as you like, but if they spoil
everything for you, there won’t be any profit.”

“Why do they spoil things? A poor thrashing machine, or your Russian
presser, they will break, but my steam press they don’t break. A
wretched Russian nag they’ll ruin, but keep good dray-horses—they won’t
ruin them. And so it is all round. We must raise our farming to a
higher level.”

“Oh, if one only had the means to do it, Nikolay Ivanovitch! It’s all
very well for you; but for me, with a son to keep at the university,
lads to be educated at the high school—how am I going to buy these
dray-horses?”

“Well, that’s what the land banks are for.”

“To get what’s left me sold by auction? No, thank you.”

“I don’t agree that it’s necessary or possible to raise the level of
agriculture still higher,” said Levin. “I devote myself to it, and I
have means, but I can do nothing. As to the banks, I don’t know to whom
they’re any good. For my part, anyway, whatever I’ve spent money on in
the way of husbandry, it has been a loss: stock—a loss, machinery—a
loss.”

“That’s true enough,” the gentleman with the gray whiskers chimed in,
positively laughing with satisfaction.

“And I’m not the only one,” pursued Levin. “I mix with all the
neighboring landowners, who are cultivating their land on a rational
system; they all, with rare exceptions, are doing so at a loss. Come,
tell us how does your land do—does it pay?” said Levin, and at once in
Sviazhsky’s eyes he detected that fleeting expression of alarm which he
had noticed whenever he had tried to penetrate beyond the outer
chambers of Sviazhsky’s mind.

Moreover, this question on Levin’s part was not quite in good faith.
Madame Sviazhskaya had just told him at tea that they had that summer
invited a German expert in bookkeeping from Moscow, who for a
consideration of five hundred roubles had investigated the management
of their property, and found that it was costing them a loss of three
thousand odd roubles. She did not remember the precise sum, but it
appeared that the German had worked it out to the fraction of a
farthing.

The gray-whiskered landowner smiled at the mention of the profits of
Sviazhsky’s famling, obviously aware how much gain his neighbor and
marshal was likely to be making.

“Possibly it does not pay,” answered Sviazhsky. “That merely proves
either that I’m a bad manager, or that I’ve sunk my capital for the
increase of my rents.”

“Oh, rent!” Levin cried with horror. “Rent there may be in Europe,
where land has been improved by the labor put into it, but with us all
the land is deteriorating from the labor put into it—in other words
they’re working it out; so there’s no question of rent.”

“How no rent? It’s a law.”

“Then we’re outside the law; rent explains nothing for us, but simply
muddles us. No, tell me how there can be a theory of rent?...”

“Will you have some junket? Masha, pass us some junket or raspberries.”
He turned to his wife. “Extraordinarily late the raspberries are
lasting this year.”

And in the happiest frame of mind Sviazhsky got up and walked off,
apparently supposing the conversation to have ended at the very point
when to Levin it seemed that it was only just beginning.

Having lost his antagonist, Levin continued the conversation with the
gray-whiskered landowner, trying to prove to him that all the
difficulty arises from the fact that we don’t find out the
peculiarities and habits of our laborer; but the landowner, like all
men who think independently and in isolation, was slow in taking in any
other person’s idea, and particularly partial to his own. He stuck to
it that the Russian peasant is a swine and likes swinishness, and that
to get him out of his swinishness one must have authority, and there is
none; one must have the stick, and we have become so liberal that we
have all of a sudden replaced the stick that served us for a thousand
years by lawyers and model prisons, where the worthless, stinking
peasant is fed on good soup and has a fixed allowance of cubic feet of
air.

“What makes you think,” said Levin, trying to get back to the question,
“that it’s impossible to find some relation to the laborer in which the
labor would become productive?”

“That never could be so with the Russian peasantry; we’ve no power over
them,” answered the landowner.

“How can new conditions be found?” said Sviazhsky. Having eaten some
junket and lighted a cigarette, he came back to the discussion. “All
possible relations to the labor force have been defined and studied,”
he said. “The relic of barbarism, the primitive commune with each
guarantee for all, will disappear of itself; serfdom has been
abolished—there remains nothing but free labor, and its forms are fixed
and ready made, and must be adopted. Permanent hands, day-laborers,
rammers—you can’t get out of those forms.”

“But Europe is dissatisfied with these forms.”

“Dissatisfied, and seeking new ones. And will find them, in all
probability.”

“That’s just what I was meaning,” answered Levin. “Why shouldn’t we
seek them for ourselves?”

“Because it would be just like inventing afresh the means for
constructing railways. They are ready, invented.”

“But if they don’t do for us, if they’re stupid?” said Levin.

And again he detected the expression of alarm in the eyes of Sviazhsky.

“Oh, yes; we’ll bury the world under our caps! We’ve found the secret
Europe was seeking for! I’ve heard all that; but, excuse me, do you
know all that’s been done in Europe on the question of the organization
of labor?”

“No, very little.”

“That question is now absorbing the best minds in Europe. The
Schulze-Delitsch movement.... And then all this enormous literature of
the labor question, the most liberal Lassalle movement ... the
Mulhausen experiment? That’s a fact by now, as you’re probably aware.”

“I have some idea of it, but very vague.”

“No, you only say that; no doubt you know all about it as well as I do.
I’m not a professor of sociology, of course, but it interested me, and
really, if it interests you, you ought to study it.”

“But what conclusion have they come to?”

“Excuse me....”

The two neighbors had risen, and Sviazhsky, once more checking Levin in
his inconvenient habit of peeping into what was beyond the outer
chambers of his mind, went to see his guests out.


Chapter 28

Levin was insufferably bored that evening with the ladies; he was
stirred as he had never been before by the idea that the
dissatisfaction he was feeling with his system of managing his land was
not an exceptional case, but the general condition of things in Russia;
that the organization of some relation of the laborers to the soil in
which they would work, as with the peasant he had met half-way to the
Sviazhskys’, was not a dream, but a problem which must be solved. And
it seemed to him that the problem could be solved, and that he ought to
try and solve it.

After saying good-night to the ladies, and promising to stay the whole
of the next day, so as to make an expedition on horseback with them to
see an interesting ruin in the crown forest, Levin went, before going
to bed, into his host’s study to get the books on the labor question
that Sviazhsky had offered him. Sviazhsky’s study was a huge room,
surrounded by bookcases and with two tables in it—one a massive
writing-table, standing in the middle of the room, and the other a
round table, covered with recent numbers of reviews and journals in
different languages, ranged like the rays of a star round the lamp. On
the writing-table was a stand of drawers marked with gold lettering,
and full of papers of various sorts.

Sviazhsky took out the books, and sat down in a rocking-chair.

“What are you looking at there?” he said to Levin, who was standing at
the round table looking through the reviews.

“Oh, yes, there’s a very interesting article here,” said Sviazhsky of
the review Levin was holding in his hand. “It appears,” he went on,
with eager interest, “that Friedrich was not, after all, the person
chiefly responsible for the partition of Poland. It is proved....”

And with his characteristic clearness, he summed up those new, very
important, and interesting revelations. Although Levin was engrossed at
the moment by his ideas about the problem of the land, he wondered, as
he heard Sviazhsky: “What is there inside of him? And why, why is he
interested in the partition of Poland?” When Sviazhsky had finished,
Levin could not help asking: “Well, and what then?” But there was
nothing to follow. It was simply interesting that it had been proved to
be so and so. But Sviazhsky did not explain, and saw no need to explain
why it was interesting to him.

“Yes, but I was very much interested by your irritable neighbor,” said
Levin, sighing. “He’s a clever fellow, and said a lot that was true.”

“Oh, get along with you! An inveterate supporter of serfdom at heart,
like all of them!” said Sviazhsky.

“Whose marshal you are.”

“Yes, only I marshal them in the other direction,” said Sviazhsky,
laughing.

“I’ll tell you what interests me very much,” said Levin. “He’s right
that our system, that’s to say of rational farming, doesn’t answer,
that the only thing that answers is the money-lender system, like that
meek-looking gentleman’s, or else the very simplest.... Whose fault is
it?”

“Our own, of course. Besides, it’s not true that it doesn’t answer. It
answers with Vassiltchikov.”

“A factory....”

“But I really don’t know what it is you are surprised at. The people
are at such a low stage of rational and moral development, that it’s
obvious they’re bound to oppose everything that’s strange to them. In
Europe, a rational system answers because the people are educated; it
follows that we must educate the people—that’s all.”

“But how are we to educate the people?”

“To educate the people three things are needed: schools, and schools,
and schools.”

“But you said yourself the people are at such a low stage of material
development: what help are schools for that?”

“Do you know, you remind me of the story of the advice given to the
sick man—You should try purgative medicine. Taken: worse. Try leeches.
Tried them: worse. Well, then, there’s nothing left but to pray to God.
Tried it: worse. That’s just how it is with us. I say political
economy; you say—worse. I say socialism: worse. Education: worse.”

“But how do schools help matters?”

“They give the peasant fresh wants.”

“Well, that’s a thing I’ve never understood,” Levin replied with heat.
“In what way are schools going to help the people to improve their
material position? You say schools, education, will give them fresh
wants. So much the worse, since they won’t be capable of satisfying
them. And in what way a knowledge of addition and subtraction and the
catechism is going to improve their material condition, I never could
make out. The day before yesterday, I met a peasant woman in the
evening with a little baby, and asked her where she was going. She said
she was going to the wise woman; her boy had screaming fits, so she was
taking him to be doctored. I asked, ‘Why, how does the wise woman cure
screaming fits?’ ‘She puts the child on the hen-roost and repeats some
charm....’”

“Well, you’re saying it yourself! What’s wanted to prevent her taking
her child to the hen-roost to cure it of screaming fits is just....”
Sviazhsky said, smiling good-humoredly.

“Oh, no!” said Levin with annoyance; “that method of doctoring I merely
meant as a simile for doctoring the people with schools. The people are
poor and ignorant—that we see as surely as the peasant woman sees the
baby is ill because it screams. But in what way this trouble of poverty
and ignorance is to be cured by schools is as incomprehensible as how
the hen-roost affects the screaming. What has to be cured is what makes
him poor.”

“Well, in that, at least, you’re in agreement with Spencer, whom you
dislike so much. He says, too, that education may be the consequence of
greater prosperity and comfort, of more frequent washing, as he says,
but not of being able to read and write....”

“Well, then, I’m very glad—or the contrary, very sorry, that I’m in
agreement with Spencer; only I’ve known it a long while. Schools can do
no good; what will do good is an economic organization in which the
people will become richer, will have more leisure—and then there will
be schools.”

“Still, all over Europe now schools are obligatory.”

“And how far do you agree with Spencer yourself about it?” asked Levin.

But there was a gleam of alarm in Sviazhsky’s eyes, and he said
smiling:

“No; that screaming story is positively capital! Did you really hear it
yourself?”

Levin saw that he was not to discover the connection between this man’s
life and his thoughts. Obviously he did not care in the least what his
reasoning led him to; all he wanted was the process of reasoning. And
he did not like it when the process of reasoning brought him into a
blind alley. That was the only thing he disliked, and avoided by
changing the conversation to something agreeable and amusing.

All the impressions of the day, beginning with the impression made by
the old peasant, which served, as it were, as the fundamental basis of
all the conceptions and ideas of the day, threw Levin into violent
excitement. This dear good Sviazhsky, keeping a stock of ideas simply
for social purposes, and obviously having some other principles hidden
from Levin, while with the crowd, whose name is legion, he guided
public opinion by ideas he did not share; that irascible country
gentleman, perfectly correct in the conclusions that he had been
worried into by life, but wrong in his exasperation against a whole
class, and that the best class in Russia; his own dissatisfaction with
the work he had been doing, and the vague hope of finding a remedy for
all this—all was blended in a sense of inward turmoil, and anticipation
of some solution near at hand.

Left alone in the room assigned him, lying on a spring mattress that
yielded unexpectedly at every movement of his arm or his leg, Levin did
not fall asleep for a long while. Not one conversation with Sviazhsky,
though he had said a great deal that was clever, had interested Levin;
but the conclusions of the irascible landowner required consideration.
Levin could not help recalling every word he had said, and in
imagination amending his own replies.

“Yes, I ought to have said to him: You say that our husbandry does not
answer because the peasant hates improvements, and that they must be
forced on him by authority. If no system of husbandry answered at all
without these improvements, you would be quite right. But the only
system that does answer is where laborer is working in accordance with
his habits, just as on the old peasant’s land half-way here. Your and
our general dissatisfaction with the system shows that either we are to
blame or the laborers. We have gone our way—the European way—a long
while, without asking ourselves about the qualities of our labor force.
Let us try to look upon the labor force not as an abstract force, but
as the _Russian peasant_ with his instincts, and we shall arrange our
system of culture in accordance with that. Imagine, I ought to have
said to him, that you have the same system as the old peasant has, that
you have found means of making your laborers take an interest in the
success of the work, and have found the happy mean in the way of
improvements which they will admit, and you will, without exhausting
the soil, get twice or three times the yield you got before. Divide it
in halves, give half as the share of labor, the surplus left you will
be greater, and the share of labor will be greater too. And to do this
one must lower the standard of husbandry and interest the laborers in
its success. How to do this?—that’s a matter of detail; but undoubtedly
it can be done.”

This idea threw Levin into a great excitement. He did not sleep half
the night, thinking over in detail the putting of his idea into
practice. He had not intended to go away next day, but he now
determined to go home early in the morning. Besides, the sister-in-law
with her low-necked bodice aroused in him a feeling akin to shame and
remorse for some utterly base action. Most important of all—he must get
back without delay: he would have to make haste to put his new project
to the peasants before the sowing of the winter wheat, so that the
sowing might be undertaken on a new basis. He had made up his mind to
revolutionize his whole system.


Chapter 29

The carrying out of Levin’s plan presented many difficulties; but he
struggled on, doing his utmost, and attained a result which, though not
what he desired, was enough to enable him, without self-deception, to
believe that the attempt was worth the trouble. One of the chief
difficulties was that the process of cultivating the land was in full
swing, that it was impossible to stop everything and begin it all again
from the beginning, and the machine had to be mended while in motion.

When on the evening that he arrived home he informed the bailiff of his
plans, the latter with visible pleasure agreed with what he said so
long as he was pointing out that all that had been done up to that time
was stupid and useless. The bailiff said that he had said so a long
while ago, but no heed had been paid him. But as for the proposal made
by Levin—to take a part as shareholder with his laborers in each
agricultural undertaking—at this the bailiff simply expressed a
profound despondency, and offered no definite opinion, but began
immediately talking of the urgent necessity of carrying the remaining
sheaves of rye the next day, and of sending the men out for the second
ploughing, so that Levin felt that this was not the time for discussing
it.

On beginning to talk to the peasants about it, and making a proposition
to cede them the land on new terms, he came into collision with the
same great difficulty that they were so much absorbed by the current
work of the day, that they had not time to consider the advantages and
disadvantages of the proposed scheme.

The simple-hearted Ivan, the cowherd, seemed completely to grasp
Levin’s proposal—that he should with his family take a share of the
profits of the cattle-yard—and he was in complete sympathy with the
plan. But when Levin hinted at the future advantages, Ivan’s face
expressed alarm and regret that he could not hear all he had to say,
and he made haste to find himself some task that would admit of no
delay: he either snatched up the fork to pitch the hay out of the pens,
or ran to get water or to clear out the dung.

Another difficulty lay in the invincible disbelief of the peasant that
a landowner’s object could be anything else than a desire to squeeze
all he could out of them. They were firmly convinced that his real aim
(whatever he might say to them) would always be in what he did not say
to them. And they themselves, in giving their opinion, said a great
deal but never said what was their real object. Moreover (Levin felt
that the irascible landowner had been right) the peasants made their
first and unalterable condition of any agreement whatever that they
should not be forced to any new methods of tillage of any kind, nor to
use new implements. They agreed that the modern plough ploughed better,
that the scarifier did the work more quickly, but they found thousands
of reasons that made it out of the question for them to use either of
them; and though he had accepted the conviction that he would have to
lower the standard of cultivation, he felt sorry to give up improved
methods, the advantages of which were so obvious. But in spite of all
these difficulties he got his way, and by autumn the system was
working, or at least so it seemed to him.

At first Levin had thought of giving up the whole farming of the land
just as it was to the peasants, the laborers, and the bailiff on new
conditions of partnership; but he was very soon convinced that this was
impossible, and determined to divide it up. The cattle-yard, the
garden, hay fields, and arable land, divided into several parts, had to
be made into separate lots. The simple-hearted cowherd, Ivan, who,
Levin fancied, understood the matter better than any of them,
collecting together a gang of workers to help him, principally of his
own family, became a partner in the cattle-yard. A distant part of the
estate, a tract of waste land that had lain fallow for eight years, was
with the help of the clever carpenter, Fyodor Ryezunov, taken by six
families of peasants on new conditions of partnership, and the peasant
Shuraev took the management of all the vegetable gardens on the same
terms. The remainder of the land was still worked on the old system,
but these three associated partnerships were the first step to a new
organization of the whole, and they completely took up Levin’s time.

It is true that in the cattle-yard things went no better than before,
and Ivan strenuously opposed warm housing for the cows and butter made
of fresh cream, affirming that cows require less food if kept cold, and
that butter is more profitable made from sour cream, and he asked for
wages just as under the old system, and took not the slightest interest
in the fact that the money he received was not wages but an advance out
of his future share in the profits.

It is true that Fyodor Ryezunov’s company did not plough over the
ground twice before sowing, as had been agreed, justifying themselves
on the plea that the time was too short. It is true that the peasants
of the same company, though they had agreed to work the land on new
conditions, always spoke of the land, not as held in partnership, but
as rented for half the crop, and more than once the peasants and
Ryezunov himself said to Levin, “If you would take a rent for the land,
it would save you trouble, and we should be more free.” Moreover the
same peasants kept putting off, on various excuses, the building of a
cattleyard and barn on the land as agreed upon, and delayed doing it
till the winter.

It is true that Shuraev would have liked to let out the kitchen gardens
he had undertaken in small lots to the peasants. He evidently quite
misunderstood, and apparently intentionally misunderstood, the
conditions upon which the land had been given to him.

Often, too, talking to the peasants and explaining to them all the
advantages of the plan, Levin felt that the peasants heard nothing but
the sound of his voice, and were firmly resolved, whatever he might
say, not to let themselves be taken in. He felt this especially when he
talked to the cleverest of the peasants, Ryezunov, and detected the
gleam in Ryezunov’s eyes which showed so plainly both ironical
amusement at Levin, and the firm conviction that, if anyone were to be
taken in, it would not be he, Ryezunov. But in spite of all this Levin
thought the system worked, and that by keeping accounts strictly and
insisting on his own way, he would prove to them in the future the
advantages of the arrangement, and then the system would go of itself.

These matters, together with the management of the land still left on
his hands, and the indoor work over his book, so engrossed Levin the
whole summer that he scarcely ever went out shooting. At the end of
August he heard that the Oblonskys had gone away to Moscow, from their
servant who brought back the side-saddle. He felt that in not answering
Darya Alexandrovna’s letter he had by his rudeness, of which he could
not think without a flush of shame, burned his ships, and that he would
never go and see them again. He had been just as rude with the
Sviazhskys, leaving them without saying good-bye. But he would never go
to see them again either. He did not care about that now. The business
of reorganizing the farming of his land absorbed him as completely as
though there would never be anything else in his life. He read the
books lent him by Sviazhsky, and copying out what he had not got, he
read both the economic and socialistic books on the subject, but, as he
had anticipated, found nothing bearing on the scheme he had undertaken.
In the books on political economy—in Mill, for instance, whom he
studied first with great ardor, hoping every minute to find an answer
to the questions that were engrossing him—he found laws deduced from
the condition of land culture in Europe; but he did not see why these
laws, which did not apply in Russia, must be general. He saw just the
same thing in the socialistic books: either they were the beautiful but
impracticable fantasies which had fascinated him when he was a student,
or they were attempts at improving, rectifying the economic position in
which Europe was placed, with which the system of land tenure in Russia
had nothing in common. Political economy told him that the laws by
which the wealth of Europe had been developed, and was developing, were
universal and unvarying. Socialism told him that development along
these lines leads to ruin. And neither of them gave an answer, or even
a hint, in reply to the question what he, Levin, and all the Russian
peasants and landowners, were to do with their millions of hands and
millions of acres, to make them as productive as possible for the
common weal.

Having once taken the subject up, he read conscientiously everything
bearing on it, and intended in the autumn to go abroad to study land
systems on the spot, in order that he might not on this question be
confronted with what so often met him on various subjects. Often, just
as he was beginning to understand the idea in the mind of anyone he was
talking to, and was beginning to explain his own, he would suddenly be
told: “But Kauffmann, but Jones, but Dubois, but Michelli? You haven’t
read them: they’ve thrashed that question out thoroughly.”

He saw now distinctly that Kauffmann and Michelli had nothing to tell
him. He knew what he wanted. He saw that Russia has splendid land,
splendid laborers, and that in certain cases, as at the peasant’s on
the way to Sviazhsky’s, the produce raised by the laborers and the land
is great—in the majority of cases when capital is applied in the
European way the produce is small, and that this simply arises from the
fact that the laborers want to work and work well only in their own
peculiar way, and that this antagonism is not incidental but
invariable, and has its roots in the national spirit. He thought that
the Russian people whose task it was to colonize and cultivate vast
tracts of unoccupied land, consciously adhered, till all their land was
occupied, to the methods suitable to their purpose, and that their
methods were by no means so bad as was generally supposed. And he
wanted to prove this theoretically in his book and practically on his
land.


Chapter 30

At the end of September the timber had been carted for building the
cattleyard on the land that had been allotted to the association of
peasants, and the butter from the cows was sold and the profits
divided. In practice the system worked capitally, or, at least, so it
seemed to Levin. In order to work out the whole subject theoretically
and to complete his book, which, in Levin’s daydreams, was not merely
to effect a revolution in political economy, but to annihilate that
science entirely and to lay the foundation of a new science of the
relation of the people to the soil, all that was left to do was to make
a tour abroad, and to study on the spot all that had been done in the
same direction, and to collect conclusive evidence that all that had
been done there was not what was wanted. Levin was only waiting for the
delivery of his wheat to receive the money for it and go abroad. But
the rains began, preventing the harvesting of the corn and potatoes
left in the fields, and putting a stop to all work, even to the
delivery of the wheat.

The mud was impassable along the roads; two mills were carried away,
and the weather got worse and worse.

On the 30th of September the sun came out in the morning, and hoping
for fine weather, Levin began making final preparations for his
journey. He gave orders for the wheat to be delivered, sent the bailiff
to the merchant to get the money owing him, and went out himself to
give some final directions on the estate before setting off.

Having finished all his business, soaked through with the streams of
water which kept running down the leather behind his neck and his
gaiters, but in the keenest and most confident temper, Levin returned
homewards in the evening. The weather had become worse than ever
towards evening; the hail lashed the drenched mare so cruelly that she
went along sideways, shaking her head and ears; but Levin was all right
under his hood, and he looked cheerfully about him at the muddy streams
running under the wheels, at the drops hanging on every bare twig, at
the whiteness of the patch of unmelted hailstones on the planks of the
bridge, at the thick layer of still juicy, fleshy leaves that lay
heaped up about the stripped elm-tree. In spite of the gloominess of
nature around him, he felt peculiarly eager. The talks he had been
having with the peasants in the further village had shown that they
were beginning to get used to their new position. The old servant to
whose hut he had gone to get dry evidently approved of Levin’s plan,
and of his own accord proposed to enter the partnership by the purchase
of cattle.

“I have only to go stubbornly on towards my aim, and I shall attain my
end,” thought Levin; “and it’s something to work and take trouble for.
This is not a matter of myself individually; the question of the public
welfare comes into it. The whole system of culture, the chief element
in the condition of the people, must be completely transformed. Instead
of poverty, general prosperity and content; instead of hostility,
harmony and unity of interests. In short, a bloodless revolution, but a
revolution of the greatest magnitude, beginning in the little circle of
our district, then the province, then Russia, the whole world. Because
a just idea cannot but be fruitful. Yes, it’s an aim worth working for.
And its being me, Kostya Levin, who went to a ball in a black tie, and
was refused by the Shtcherbatskaya girl, and who was intrinsically such
a pitiful, worthless creature—that proves nothing; I feel sure Franklin
felt just as worthless, and he too had no faith in himself, thinking of
himself as a whole. That means nothing. And he too, most likely, had an
Agafea Mihalovna to whom he confided his secrets.”

Musing on such thoughts Levin reached home in the darkness.

The bailiff, who had been to the merchant, had come back and brought
part of the money for the wheat. An agreement had been made with the
old servant, and on the road the bailiff had learned that everywhere
the corn was still standing in the fields, so that his one hundred and
sixty shocks that had not been carried were nothing in comparison with
the losses of others.

After dinner Levin was sitting, as he usually did, in an easy chair
with a book, and as he read he went on thinking of the journey before
him in connection with his book. Today all the significance of his book
rose before him with special distinctness, and whole periods ranged
themselves in his mind in illustration of his theories. “I must write
that down,” he thought. “That ought to form a brief introduction, which
I thought unnecessary before.” He got up to go to his writing-table,
and Laska, lying at his feet, got up too, stretching and looking at him
as though to inquire where to go. But he had not time to write it down,
for the head peasants had come round, and Levin went out into the hall
to them.

After his levee, that is to say, giving directions about the labors of
the next day, and seeing all the peasants who had business with him,
Levin went back to his study and sat down to work.

Laska lay under the table; Agafea Mihalovna settled herself in her
place with her stocking.

After writing for a little while, Levin suddenly thought with
exceptional vividness of Kitty, her refusal, and their last meeting. He
got up and began walking about the room.

“What’s the use of being dreary?” said Agafea Mihalovna. “Come, why do
you stay on at home? You ought to go to some warm springs, especially
now you’re ready for the journey.”

“Well, I am going away the day after tomorrow, Agafea Mihalovna; I must
finish my work.”

“There, there, your work, you say! As if you hadn’t done enough for the
peasants! Why, as ’tis, they’re saying, ‘Your master will be getting
some honor from the Tsar for it.’ Indeed and it is a strange thing; why
need you worry about the peasants?”

“I’m not worrying about them; I’m doing it for my own good.”

Agafea Mihalovna knew every detail of Levin’s plans for his land. Levin
often put his views before her in all their complexity, and not
uncommonly he argued with her and did not agree with her comments. But
on this occasion she entirely misinterpreted what he had said.

“Of one’s soul’s salvation we all know and must think before all else,”
she said with a sigh. “Parfen Denisitch now, for all he was no scholar,
he died a death that God grant everyone of us the like,” she said,
referring to a servant who had died recently. “Took the sacrament and
all.”

“That’s not what I mean,” said he. “I mean that I’m acting for my own
advantage. It’s all the better for me if the peasants do their work
better.”

“Well, whatever you do, if he’s a lazy good-for-nought, everything’ll
be at sixes and sevens. If he has a conscience, he’ll work, and if not,
there’s no doing anything.”

“Oh, come, you say yourself Ivan has begun looking after the cattle
better.”

“All I say is,” answered Agafea Mihalovna, evidently not speaking at
random, but in strict sequence of idea, “that you ought to get married,
that’s what I say.”

Agafea Mihalovna’s allusion to the very subject he had only just been
thinking about, hurt and stung him. Levin scowled, and without
answering her, he sat down again to his work, repeating to himself all
that he had been thinking of the real significance of that work. Only
at intervals he listened in the stillness to the click of Agafea
Mihalovna’s needles, and recollecting what he did not want to remember,
he frowned again.

At nine o’clock they heard the bell and the faint vibration of a
carriage over the mud.

“Well, here’s visitors come to us, and you won’t be dull,” said Agafea
Mihalovna, getting up and going to the door. But Levin overtook her.
His work was not going well now, and he was glad of a visitor, whoever
it might be.


Chapter 31

Running halfway down the staircase, Levin caught a sound he knew, a
familiar cough in the hall. But he heard it indistinctly through the
sound of his own footsteps, and hoped he was mistaken. Then he caught
sight of a long, bony, familiar figure, and now it seemed there was no
possibility of mistake; and yet he still went on hoping that this tall
man taking off his fur cloak and coughing was not his brother Nikolay.

Levin loved his brother, but being with him was always a torture. Just
now, when Levin, under the influence of the thoughts that had come to
him, and Agafea Mihalovna’s hint, was in a troubled and uncertain
humor, the meeting with his brother that he had to face seemed
particularly difficult. Instead of a lively, healthy visitor, some
outsider who would, he hoped, cheer him up in his uncertain humor, he
had to see his brother, who knew him through and through, who would
call forth all the thoughts nearest his heart, would force him to show
himself fully. And that he was not disposed to do.

Angry with himself for so base a feeling, Levin ran into the hall; as
soon as he had seen his brother close, this feeling of selfish
disappointment vanished instantly and was replaced by pity. Terrible as
his brother Nikolay had been before in his emaciation and sickliness,
now he looked still more emaciated, still more wasted. He was a
skeleton covered with skin.

He stood in the hall, jerking his long thin neck, and pulling the scarf
off it, and smiled a strange and pitiful smile. When he saw that smile,
submissive and humble, Levin felt something clutching at his throat.

“You see, I’ve come to you,” said Nikolay in a thick voice, never for
one second taking his eyes off his brother’s face. “I’ve been meaning
to a long while, but I’ve been unwell all the time. Now I’m ever so
much better,” he said, rubbing his beard with his big thin hands.

“Yes, yes!” answered Levin. And he felt still more frightened when,
kissing him, he felt with his lips the dryness of his brother’s skin
and saw close to him his big eyes, full of a strange light.

A few weeks before, Konstantin Levin had written to his brother that
through the sale of the small part of the property, that had remained
undivided, there was a sum of about two thousand roubles to come to him
as his share.

Nikolay said that he had come now to take this money and, what was more
important, to stay a while in the old nest, to get in touch with the
earth, so as to renew his strength like the heroes of old for the work
that lay before him. In spite of his exaggerated stoop, and the
emaciation that was so striking from his height, his movements were as
rapid and abrupt as ever. Levin led him into his study.

His brother dressed with particular care—a thing he never used to
do—combed his scanty, lank hair, and, smiling, went upstairs.

He was in the most affectionate and good-humored mood, just as Levin
often remembered him in childhood. He even referred to Sergey
Ivanovitch without rancor. When he saw Agafea Mihalovna, he made jokes
with her and asked after the old servants. The news of the death of
Parfen Denisitch made a painful impression on him. A look of fear
crossed his face, but he regained his serenity immediately.

“Of course he was quite old,” he said, and changed the subject. “Well,
I’ll spend a month or two with you, and then I’m off to Moscow. Do you
know, Myakov has promised me a place there, and I’m going into the
service. Now I’m going to arrange my life quite differently,” he went
on. “You know I got rid of that woman.”

“Marya Nikolaevna? Why, what for?”

“Oh, she was a horrid woman! She caused me all sorts of worries.” But
he did not say what the annoyances were. He could not say that he had
cast off Marya Nikolaevna because the tea was weak, and, above all,
because she would look after him, as though he were an invalid.

“Besides, I want to turn over a new leaf completely now. I’ve done
silly things, of course, like everyone else, but money’s the last
consideration; I don’t regret it. So long as there’s health, and my
health, thank God, is quite restored.”

Levin listened and racked his brains, but could think of nothing to
say. Nikolay probably felt the same; he began questioning his brother
about his affairs; and Levin was glad to talk about himself, because
then he could speak without hypocrisy. He told his brother of his plans
and his doings.

His brother listened, but evidently he was not interested by it.

These two men were so akin, so near each other, that the slightest
gesture, the tone of voice, told both more than could be said in words.

Both of them now had only one thought—the illness of Nikolay and the
nearness of his death—which stifled all else. But neither of them dared
to speak of it, and so whatever they said—not uttering the one thought
that filled their minds—was all falsehood. Never had Levin been so glad
when the evening was over and it was time to go to bed. Never with any
outside person, never on any official visit had he been so unnatural
and false as he was that evening. And the consciousness of this
unnaturalness, and the remorse he felt at it, made him even more
unnatural. He wanted to weep over his dying, dearly loved brother, and
he had to listen and keep on talking of how he meant to live.

As the house was damp, and only one bedroom had been kept heated, Levin
put his brother to sleep in his own bedroom behind a screen.

His brother got into bed, and whether he slept or did not sleep, tossed
about like a sick man, coughed, and when he could not get his throat
clear, mumbled something. Sometimes when his breathing was painful, he
said, “Oh, my God!” Sometimes when he was choking he muttered angrily,
“Ah, the devil!” Levin could not sleep for a long while, hearing him.
His thoughts were of the most various, but the end of all his thoughts
was the same—death. Death, the inevitable end of all, for the first
time presented itself to him with irresistible force. And death, which
was here in this loved brother, groaning half asleep and from habit
calling without distinction on God and the devil, was not so remote as
it had hitherto seemed to him. It was in himself too, he felt that. If
not today, tomorrow, if not tomorrow, in thirty years, wasn’t it all
the same! And what was this inevitable death—he did not know, had never
thought about it, and what was more, had not the power, had not the
courage to think about it.

“I work, I want to do something, but I had forgotten it must all end; I
had forgotten—death.”

He sat on his bed in the darkness, crouched up, hugging his knees, and
holding his breath from the strain of thought, he pondered. But the
more intensely he thought, the clearer it became to him that it was
indubitably so, that in reality, looking upon life, he had forgotten
one little fact—that death will come, and all ends; that nothing was
even worth beginning, and that there was no helping it anyway. Yes, it
was awful, but it was so.

“But I am alive still. Now what’s to be done? what’s to be done?” he
said in despair. He lighted a candle, got up cautiously and went to the
looking-glass, and began looking at his face and hair. Yes, there were
gray hairs about his temples. He opened his mouth. His back teeth were
beginning to decay. He bared his muscular arms. Yes, there was strength
in them. But Nikolay, who lay there breathing with what was left of
lungs, had had a strong, healthy body too. And suddenly he recalled how
they used to go to bed together as children, and how they only waited
till Fyodor Bogdanitch was out of the room to fling pillows at each
other and laugh, laugh irrepressibly, so that even their awe of Fyodor
Bogdanitch could not check the effervescing, overbrimming sense of life
and happiness. “And now that bent, hollow chest ... and I, not knowing
what will become of me, or wherefore....”

“K...ha! K...ha! Damnation! Why do you keep fidgeting, why don’t you go
to sleep?” his brother’s voice called to him.

“Oh, I don’t know, I’m not sleepy.”

“I have had a good sleep, I’m not in a sweat now. Just see, feel my
shirt; it’s not wet, is it?”

Levin felt, withdrew behind the screen, and put out the candle, but for
a long while he could not sleep. The question how to live had hardly
begun to grow a little clearer to him, when a new, insoluble question
presented itself—death.

“Why, he’s dying—yes, he’ll die in the spring, and how help him? What
can I say to him? What do I know about it? I’d even forgotten that it
was at all.”


Chapter 32

Levin had long before made the observation that when one is
uncomfortable with people from their being excessively amenable and
meek, one is apt very soon after to find things intolerable from their
touchiness and irritability. He felt that this was how it would be with
his brother. And his brother Nikolay’s gentleness did in fact not last
out for long. The very next morning he began to be irritable, and
seemed doing his best to find fault with his brother, attacking him on
his tenderest points.

Levin felt himself to blame, and could not set things right. He felt
that if they had both not kept up appearances, but had spoken, as it is
called, from the heart—that is to say, had said only just what they
were thinking and feeling—they would simply have looked into each
other’s faces, and Konstantin could only have said, “You’re dying,
you’re dying!” and Nikolay could only have answered, “I know I’m dying,
but I’m afraid, I’m afraid, I’m afraid!” And they could have said
nothing more, if they had said only what was in their hearts. But life
like that was impossible, and so Konstantin tried to do what he had
been trying to do all his life, and never could learn to do, though, as
far as he could observe, many people knew so well how to do it, and
without it there was no living at all. He tried to say what he was not
thinking, but he felt continually that it had a ring of falsehood, that
his brother detected him in it, and was exasperated at it.

The third day Nikolay induced his brother to explain his plan to him
again, and began not merely attacking it, but intentionally confounding
it with communism.

“You’ve simply borrowed an idea that’s not your own, but you’ve
distorted it, and are trying to apply it where it’s not applicable.”

“But I tell you it’s nothing to do with it. They deny the justice of
property, of capital, of inheritance, while I do not deny this chief
stimulus.” (Levin felt disgusted himself at using such expressions, but
ever since he had been engrossed by his work, he had unconsciously come
more and more frequently to use words not Russian.) “All I want is to
regulate labor.”

“Which means, you’ve borrowed an idea, stripped it of all that gave it
its force, and want to make believe that it’s something new,” said
Nikolay, angrily tugging at his necktie.

“But my idea has nothing in common....”

“That, anyway,” said Nikolay Levin, with an ironical smile, his eyes
flashing malignantly, “has the charm of—what’s one to call
it?—geometrical symmetry, of clearness, of definiteness. It may be a
Utopia. But if once one allows the possibility of making of all the
past a _tabula rasa_—no property, no family—then labor would organize
itself. But you gain nothing....”

“Why do you mix things up? I’ve never been a communist.”

“But I have, and I consider it’s premature, but rational, and it has a
future, just like Christianity in its first ages.”

“All that I maintain is that the labor force ought to be investigated
from the point of view of natural science; that is to say, it ought to
be studied, its qualities ascertained....”

“But that’s utter waste of time. That force finds a certain form of
activity of itself, according to the stage of its development. There
have been slaves first everywhere, then metayers; and we have the
half-crop system, rent, and day laborers. What are you trying to find?”

Levin suddenly lost his temper at these words, because at the bottom of
his heart he was afraid that it was true—true that he was trying to
hold the balance even between communism and the familiar forms, and
that this was hardly possible.

“I am trying to find means of working productively for myself and for
the laborers. I want to organize....” he answered hotly.

“You don’t want to organize anything; it’s simply just as you’ve been
all your life, that you want to be original to pose as not exploiting
the peasants simply, but with some idea in view.”

“Oh, all right, that’s what you think—and let me alone!” answered
Levin, feeling the muscles of his left cheek twitching uncontrollably.

“You’ve never had, and never have, convictions; all you want is to
please your vanity.”

“Oh, very well; then let me alone!”

“And I will let you alone! and it’s high time I did, and go to the
devil with you! and I’m very sorry I ever came!”

In spite of all Levin’s efforts to soothe his brother afterwards,
Nikolay would listen to nothing he said, declaring that it was better
to part, and Konstantin saw that it simply was that life was unbearable
to him.

Nikolay was just getting ready to go, when Konstantin went in to him
again and begged him, rather unnaturally, to forgive him if he had hurt
his feelings in any way.

“Ah, generosity!” said Nikolay, and he smiled. “If you want to be
right, I can give you that satisfaction. You’re in the right; but I’m
going all the same.”

It was only just at parting that Nikolay kissed him, and said, looking
with sudden strangeness and seriousness at his brother:

“Anyway, don’t remember evil against me, Kostya!” and his voice
quivered. These were the only words that had been spoken sincerely
between them. Levin knew that those words meant, “You see, and you
know, that I’m in a bad way, and maybe we shall not see each other
again.” Levin knew this, and the tears gushed from his eyes. He kissed
his brother once more, but he could not speak, and knew not what to
say.

Three days after his brother’s departure, Levin too set off for his
foreign tour. Happening to meet Shtcherbatsky, Kitty’s cousin, in the
railway train, Levin greatly astonished him by his depression.

“What’s the matter with you?” Shtcherbatsky asked him.

“Oh, nothing; there’s not much happiness in life.”

“Not much? You come with me to Paris instead of to Mulhausen. You shall
see how to be happy.”

“No, I’ve done with it all. It’s time I was dead.”

“Well, that’s a good one!” said Shtcherbatsky, laughing; “why, I’m only
just getting ready to begin.”

“Yes, I thought the same not long ago, but now I know I shall soon be
dead.”

Levin said what he had genuinely been thinking of late. He saw nothing
but death or the advance towards death in everything. But his cherished
scheme only engrossed him the more. Life had to be got through somehow
till death did come. Darkness had fallen upon everything for him; but
just because of this darkness he felt that the one guiding clue in the
darkness was his work, and he clutched it and clung to it with all his
strength.




PART FOUR

Chapter 1


The Karenins, husband and wife, continued living in the same house, met
every day, but were complete strangers to one another. Alexey
Alexandrovitch made it a rule to see his wife every day, so that the
servants might have no grounds for suppositions, but avoided dining at
home. Vronsky was never at Alexey Alexandrovitch’s house, but Anna saw
him away from home, and her husband was aware of it.

The position was one of misery for all three; and not one of them would
have been equal to enduring this position for a single day, if it had
not been for the expectation that it would change, that it was merely a
temporary painful ordeal which would pass over. Alexey Alexandrovitch
hoped that this passion would pass, as everything does pass, that
everyone would forget about it, and his name would remain unsullied.
Anna, on whom the position depended, and for whom it was more miserable
than for anyone, endured it because she not merely hoped, but firmly
believed, that it would all very soon be settled and come right. She
had not the least idea what would settle the position, but she firmly
believed that something would very soon turn up now. Vronsky, against
his own will or wishes, followed her lead, hoped too that something,
apart from his own action, would be sure to solve all difficulties.

In the middle of the winter Vronsky spent a very tiresome week. A
foreign prince, who had come on a visit to Petersburg, was put under
his charge, and he had to show him the sights worth seeing. Vronsky was
of distinguished appearance; he possessed, moreover, the art of
behaving with respectful dignity, and was used to having to do with
such grand personages—that was how he came to be put in charge of the
prince. But he felt his duties very irksome. The prince was anxious to
miss nothing of which he would be asked at home, had he seen that in
Russia? And on his own account he was anxious to enjoy to the utmost
all Russian forms of amusement. Vronsky was obliged to be his guide in
satisfying both these inclinations. The mornings they spent driving to
look at places of interest; the evenings they passed enjoying the
national entertainments. The prince rejoiced in health exceptional even
among princes. By gymnastics and careful attention to his health he had
brought himself to such a point that in spite of his excess in pleasure
he looked as fresh as a big glossy green Dutch cucumber. The prince had
traveled a great deal, and considered one of the chief advantages of
modern facilities of communication was the accessibility of the
pleasures of all nations.

He had been in Spain, and there had indulged in serenades and had made
friends with a Spanish girl who played the mandolin. In Switzerland he
had killed chamois. In England he had galloped in a red coat over
hedges and killed two hundred pheasants for a bet. In Turkey he had got
into a harem; in India he had hunted on an elephant, and now in Russia
he wished to taste all the specially Russian forms of pleasure.

Vronsky, who was, as it were, chief master of the ceremonies to him,
was at great pains to arrange all the Russian amusements suggested by
various persons to the prince. They had race horses, and Russian
pancakes and bear hunts and three-horse sledges, and gypsies and
drinking feasts, with the Russian accompaniment of broken crockery. And
the prince with surprising ease fell in with the Russian spirit,
smashed trays full of crockery, sat with a gypsy girl on his knee, and
seemed to be asking—what more, and does the whole Russian spirit
consist in just this?

In reality, of all the Russian entertainments the prince liked best
French actresses and ballet dancers and white-seal champagne. Vronsky
was used to princes, but, either because he had himself changed of
late, or that he was in too close proximity to the prince, that week
seemed fearfully wearisome to him. The whole of that week he
experienced a sensation such as a man might have set in charge of a
dangerous madman, afraid of the madman, and at the same time, from
being with him, fearing for his own reason. Vronsky was continually
conscious of the necessity of never for a second relaxing the tone of
stern official respectfulness, that he might not himself be insulted.
The prince’s manner of treating the very people who, to Vronsky’s
surprise, were ready to descend to any depths to provide him with
Russian amusements, was contemptuous. His criticisms of Russian women,
whom he wished to study, more than once made Vronsky crimson with
indignation. The chief reason why the prince was so particularly
disagreeable to Vronsky was that he could not help seeing himself in
him. And what he saw in this mirror did not gratify his self-esteem. He
was a very stupid and very self-satisfied and very healthy and very
well-washed man, and nothing else. He was a gentleman—that was true,
and Vronsky could not deny it. He was equable and not cringing with his
superiors, was free and ingratiating in his behavior with his equals,
and was contemptuously indulgent with his inferiors. Vronsky was
himself the same, and regarded it as a great merit to be so. But for
this prince he was an inferior, and his contemptuous and indulgent
attitude to him revolted him.

“Brainless beef! can I be like that?” he thought.

Be that as it might, when, on the seventh day, he parted from the
prince, who was starting for Moscow, and received his thanks, he was
happy to be rid of his uncomfortable position and the unpleasant
reflection of himself. He said good-bye to him at the station on their
return from a bear hunt, at which they had had a display of Russian
prowess kept up all night.


Chapter 2

When he got home, Vronsky found there a note from Anna. She wrote, “I
am ill and unhappy. I cannot come out, but I cannot go on longer
without seeing you. Come in this evening. Alexey Alexandrovitch goes to
the council at seven and will be there till ten.” Thinking for an
instant of the strangeness of her bidding him come straight to her, in
spite of her husband’s insisting on her not receiving him, he decided
to go.

Vronsky had that winter got his promotion, was now a colonel, had left
the regimental quarters, and was living alone. After having some lunch,
he lay down on the sofa immediately, and in five minutes memories of
the hideous scenes he had witnessed during the last few days were
confused together and joined on to a mental image of Anna and of the
peasant who had played an important part in the bear hunt, and Vronsky
fell asleep. He waked up in the dark, trembling with horror, and made
haste to light a candle. “What was it? What? What was the dreadful
thing I dreamed? Yes, yes; I think a little dirty man with a disheveled
beard was stooping down doing something, and all of a sudden he began
saying some strange words in French. Yes, there was nothing else in the
dream,” he said to himself. “But why was it so awful?” He vividly
recalled the peasant again and those incomprehensible French words the
peasant had uttered, and a chill of horror ran down his spine.

“What nonsense!” thought Vronsky, and glanced at his watch.

It was half-past eight already. He rang up his servant, dressed in
haste, and went out onto the steps, completely forgetting the dream and
only worried at being late. As he drove up to the Karenins’ entrance he
looked at his watch and saw it was ten minutes to nine. A high, narrow
carriage with a pair of grays was standing at the entrance. He
recognized Anna’s carriage. “She is coming to me,” thought Vronsky,
“and better she should. I don’t like going into that house. But no
matter; I can’t hide myself,” he thought, and with that manner peculiar
to him from childhood, as of a man who has nothing to be ashamed of,
Vronsky got out of his sledge and went to the door. The door opened,
and the hall-porter with a rug on his arm called the carriage. Vronsky,
though he did not usually notice details, noticed at this moment the
amazed expression with which the porter glanced at him. In the very
doorway Vronsky almost ran up against Alexey Alexandrovitch. The gas
jet threw its full light on the bloodless, sunken face under the black
hat and on the white cravat, brilliant against the beaver of the coat.
Karenin’s fixed, dull eyes were fastened upon Vronsky’s face. Vronsky
bowed, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, chewing his lips, lifted his hand to
his hat and went on. Vronsky saw him without looking round get into the
carriage, pick up the rug and the opera-glass at the window and
disappear. Vronsky went into the hall. His brows were scowling, and his
eyes gleamed with a proud and angry light in them.

“What a position!” he thought. “If he would fight, would stand up for
his honor, I could act, could express my feelings; but this weakness or
baseness.... He puts me in the position of playing false, which I never
meant and never mean to do.”

Vronsky’s ideas had changed since the day of his conversation with Anna
in the Vrede garden. Unconsciously yielding to the weakness of Anna—who
had surrendered herself up to him utterly, and simply looked to him to
decide her fate, ready to submit to anything—he had long ceased to
think that their tie might end as he had thought then. His ambitious
plans had retreated into the background again, and feeling that he had
got out of that circle of activity in which everything was definite, he
had given himself entirely to his passion, and that passion was binding
him more and more closely to her.

He was still in the hall when he caught the sound of her retreating
footsteps. He knew she had been expecting him, had listened for him,
and was now going back to the drawing-room.

“No,” she cried, on seeing him, and at the first sound of her voice the
tears came into her eyes. “No; if things are to go on like this, the
end will come much, much too soon.”

“What is it, dear one?”

“What? I’ve been waiting in agony for an hour, two hours ... No, I
won’t ... I can’t quarrel with you. Of course you couldn’t come. No, I
won’t.” She laid her two hands on his shoulders, and looked a long
while at him with a profound, passionate, and at the same time
searching look. She was studying his face to make up for the time she
had not seen him. She was, every time she saw him, making the picture
of him in her imagination (incomparably superior, impossible in
reality) fit with him as he really was.


Chapter 3

“You met him?” she asked, when they had sat down at the table in the
lamplight. “You’re punished, you see, for being late.”

“Yes; but how was it? Wasn’t he to be at the council?”

“He had been and come back, and was going out somewhere again. But
that’s no matter. Don’t talk about it. Where have you been? With the
prince still?”

She knew every detail of his existence. He was going to say that he had
been up all night and had dropped asleep, but looking at her thrilled
and rapturous face, he was ashamed. And he said he had had to go to
report on the prince’s departure.

“But it’s over now? He is gone?”

“Thank God it’s over! You wouldn’t believe how insufferable it’s been
for me.”

“Why so? Isn’t it the life all of you, all young men, always lead?” she
said, knitting her brows; and taking up the crochet work that was lying
on the table, she began drawing the hook out of it, without looking at
Vronsky.

“I gave that life up long ago,” said he, wondering at the change in her
face, and trying to divine its meaning. “And I confess,” he said, with
a smile, showing his thick, white teeth, “this week I’ve been, as it
were, looking at myself in a glass, seeing that life, and I didn’t like
it.”

She held the work in her hands, but did not crochet, and looked at him
with strange, shining, and hostile eyes.

“This morning Liza came to see me—they’re not afraid to call on me, in
spite of the Countess Lidia Ivanovna,” she put in—“and she told me
about your Athenian evening. How loathsome!”

“I was just going to say....”

She interrupted him. “It was that Thérèse you used to know?”

“I was just saying....”

“How disgusting you are, you men! How is it you can’t understand that a
woman can never forget that,” she said, getting more and more angry,
and so letting him see the cause of her irritation, “especially a woman
who cannot know your life? What do I know? What have I ever known?” she
said, “what you tell me. And how do I know whether you tell me the
truth?...”

“Anna, you hurt me. Don’t you trust me? Haven’t I told you that I
haven’t a thought I wouldn’t lay bare to you?”

“Yes, yes,” she said, evidently trying to suppress her jealous
thoughts. “But if only you knew how wretched I am! I believe you, I
believe you.... What were you saying?”

But he could not at once recall what he had been going to say. These
fits of jealousy, which of late had been more and more frequent with
her, horrified him, and however much he tried to disguise the fact,
made him feel cold to her, although he knew the cause of her jealousy
was her love for him. How often he had told himself that her love was
happiness; and now she loved him as a woman can love when love has
outweighed for her all the good things of life—and he was much further
from happiness than when he had followed her from Moscow. Then he had
thought himself unhappy, but happiness was before him; now he felt that
the best happiness was already left behind. She was utterly unlike what
she had been when he first saw her. Both morally and physically she had
changed for the worse. She had broadened out all over, and in her face
at the time when she was speaking of the actress there was an evil
expression of hatred that distorted it. He looked at her as a man looks
at a faded flower he has gathered, with difficulty recognizing in it
the beauty for which he picked and ruined it. And in spite of this he
felt that then, when his love was stronger, he could, if he had greatly
wished it, have torn that love out of his heart; but now, when as at
that moment it seemed to him he felt no love for her, he knew that what
bound him to her could not be broken.

“Well, well, what was it you were going to say about the prince? I have
driven away the fiend,” she added. The fiend was the name they had
given her jealousy. “What did you begin to tell me about the prince?
Why did you find it so tiresome?”

“Oh, it was intolerable!” he said, trying to pick up the thread of his
interrupted thought. “He does not improve on closer acquaintance. If
you want him defined, here he is: a prime, well-fed beast such as takes
medals at the cattle shows, and nothing more,” he said, with a tone of
vexation that interested her.

“No; how so?” she replied. “He’s seen a great deal, anyway; he’s
cultured?”

“It’s an utterly different culture—their culture. He’s cultivated, one
sees, simply to be able to despise culture, as they despise everything
but animal pleasures.”

“But don’t you all care for these animal pleasures?” she said, and
again he noticed a dark look in her eyes that avoided him.

“How is it you’re defending him?” he said, smiling.

“I’m not defending him, it’s nothing to me; but I imagine, if you had
not cared for those pleasures yourself, you might have got out of them.
But if it affords you satisfaction to gaze at Thérèse in the attire of
Eve....”

“Again, the devil again,” Vronsky said, taking the hand she had laid on
the table and kissing it.

“Yes; but I can’t help it. You don’t know what I have suffered waiting
for you. I believe I’m not jealous. I’m not jealous: I believe you when
you’re here; but when you’re away somewhere leading your life, so
incomprehensible to me....”

She turned away from him, pulled the hook at last out of the crochet
work, and rapidly, with the help of her forefinger, began working loop
after loop of the wool that was dazzling white in the lamplight, while
the slender wrist moved swiftly, nervously in the embroidered cuff.

“How was it, then? Where did you meet Alexey Alexandrovitch?” Her voice
sounded in an unnatural and jarring tone.

“We ran up against each other in the doorway.”

“And he bowed to you like this?”

She drew a long face, and half-closing her eyes, quickly transformed
her expression, folded her hands, and Vronsky suddenly saw in her
beautiful face the very expression with which Alexey Alexandrovitch had
bowed to him. He smiled, while she laughed gaily, with that sweet, deep
laugh, which was one of her greatest charms.

“I don’t understand him in the least,” said Vronsky. “If after your
avowal to him at your country house he had broken with you, if he had
called me out—but this I can’t understand. How can he put up with such
a position? He feels it, that’s evident.”

“He?” she said sneeringly. “He’s perfectly satisfied.”

“What are we all miserable for, when everything might be so happy?”

“Only not he. Don’t I know him, the falsity in which he’s utterly
steeped?... Could one, with any feeling, live as he is living with me?
He understands nothing, and feels nothing. Could a man of any feeling
live in the same house with his unfaithful wife? Could he talk to her,
call her ‘my dear’?”

And again she could not help mimicking him: “‘Anna, _ma chère_; Anna,
dear!’”

“He’s not a man, not a human being—he’s a doll! No one knows him; but I
know him. Oh, if I’d been in his place, I’d long ago have killed, have
torn to pieces a wife like me. I wouldn’t have said, ‘Anna, _ma
chère_’! He’s not a man, he’s an official machine. He doesn’t
understand that I’m your wife, that he’s outside, that he’s
superfluous.... Don’t let’s talk of him!...”

“You’re unfair, very unfair, dearest,” said Vronsky, trying to soothe
her. “But never mind, don’t let’s talk of him. Tell me what you’ve been
doing? What is the matter? What has been wrong with you, and what did
the doctor say?”

She looked at him with mocking amusement. Evidently she had hit on
other absurd and grotesque aspects in her husband and was awaiting the
moment to give expression to them.

But he went on:

“I imagine that it’s not illness, but your condition. When will it be?”

The ironical light died away in her eyes, but a different smile, a
consciousness of something, he did not know what, and of quiet
melancholy, came over her face.

“Soon, soon. You say that our position is miserable, that we must put
an end to it. If you knew how terrible it is to me, what I would give
to be able to love you freely and boldly! I should not torture myself
and torture you with my jealousy.... And it will come soon, but not as
we expect.”

And at the thought of how it would come, she seemed so pitiable to
herself that tears came into her eyes, and she could not go on. She
laid her hand on his sleeve, dazzling and white with its rings in the
lamplight.

“It won’t come as we suppose. I didn’t mean to say this to you, but
you’ve made me. Soon, soon, all will be over, and we shall all, all be
at peace, and suffer no more.”

“I don’t understand,” he said, understanding her.

“You asked when? Soon. And I shan’t live through it. Don’t interrupt
me!” and she made haste to speak. “I know it; I know for certain. I
shall die; and I’m very glad I shall die, and release myself and you.”

Tears dropped from her eyes; he bent down over her hand and began
kissing it, trying to hide his emotion, which, he knew, had no sort of
grounds, though he could not control it.

“Yes, it’s better so,” she said, tightly gripping his hand. “That’s the
only way, the only way left us.”

He had recovered himself, and lifted his head.

“How absurd! What absurd nonsense you are talking!”

“No, it’s the truth.”

“What, what’s the truth?”

“That I shall die. I have had a dream.”

“A dream?” repeated Vronsky, and instantly he recalled the peasant of
his dream.

“Yes, a dream,” she said. “It’s a long while since I dreamed it. I
dreamed that I ran into my bedroom, that I had to get something there,
to find out something; you know how it is in dreams,” she said, her
eyes wide with horror; “and in the bedroom, in the corner, stood
something.”

“Oh, what nonsense! How can you believe....”

But she would not let him interrupt her. What she was saying was too
important to her.

“And the something turned round, and I saw it was a peasant with a
disheveled beard, little, and dreadful looking. I wanted to run away,
but he bent down over a sack, and was fumbling there with his
hands....”

She showed how he had moved his hands. There was terror in her face.
And Vronsky, remembering his dream, felt the same terror filling his
soul.

“He was fumbling and kept talking quickly, quickly in French, you know:
_Il faut le battre, le fer, le broyer, le pétrir_.... And in my horror
I tried to wake up, and woke up ... but woke up in the dream. And I
began asking myself what it meant. And Korney said to me: ‘In
childbirth you’ll die, ma’am, you’ll die....’ And I woke up.”

“What nonsense, what nonsense!” said Vronsky; but he felt himself that
there was no conviction in his voice.

“But don’t let’s talk of it. Ring the bell, I’ll have tea. And stay a
little now; it’s not long I shall....”

But all at once she stopped. The expression of her face instantaneously
changed. Horror and excitement were suddenly replaced by a look of
soft, solemn, blissful attention. He could not comprehend the meaning
of the change. She was listening to the stirring of the new life within
her.


Chapter 4

Alexey Alexandrovitch, after meeting Vronsky on his own steps, drove,
as he had intended, to the Italian opera. He sat through two acts
there, and saw everyone he had wanted to see. On returning home, he
carefully scrutinized the hat stand, and noticing that there was not a
military overcoat there, he went, as usual, to his own room. But,
contrary to his usual habit, he did not go to bed, he walked up and
down his study till three o’clock in the morning. The feeling of
furious anger with his wife, who would not observe the proprieties and
keep to the one stipulation he had laid on her, not to receive her
lover in her own home, gave him no peace. She had not complied with his
request, and he was bound to punish her and carry out his threat—obtain
a divorce and take away his son. He knew all the difficulties connected
with this course, but he had said he would do it, and now he must carry
out his threat. Countess Lidia Ivanovna had hinted that this was the
best way out of his position, and of late the obtaining of divorces had
been brought to such perfection that Alexey Alexandrovitch saw a
possibility of overcoming the formal difficulties. Misfortunes never
come singly, and the affairs of the reorganization of the native
tribes, and of the irrigation of the lands of the Zaraisky province,
had brought such official worries upon Alexey Alexandrovitch that he
had been of late in a continual condition of extreme irritability.

He did not sleep the whole night, and his fury, growing in a sort of
vast, arithmetical progression, reached its highest limits in the
morning. He dressed in haste, and as though carrying his cup full of
wrath, and fearing to spill any over, fearing to lose with his wrath
the energy necessary for the interview with his wife, he went into her
room directly he heard she was up.

Anna, who had thought she knew her husband so well, was amazed at his
appearance when he went in to her. His brow was lowering, and his eyes
stared darkly before him, avoiding her eyes; his mouth was tightly and
contemptuously shut. In his walk, in his gestures, in the sound of his
voice there was a determination and firmness such as his wife had never
seen in him. He went into her room, and without greeting her, walked
straight up to her writing-table, and taking her keys, opened a drawer.

“What do you want?” she cried.

“Your lover’s letters,” he said.

“They’re not here,” she said, shutting the drawer; but from that action
he saw he had guessed right, and roughly pushing away her hand, he
quickly snatched a portfolio in which he knew she used to put her most
important papers. She tried to pull the portfolio away, but he pushed
her back.

“Sit down! I have to speak to you,” he said, putting the portfolio
under his arm, and squeezing it so tightly with his elbow that his
shoulder stood up. Amazed and intimidated, she gazed at him in silence.

“I told you that I would not allow you to receive your lover in this
house.”

“I had to see him to....”

She stopped, not finding a reason.

“I do not enter into the details of why a woman wants to see her
lover.”

“I meant, I only....” she said, flushing hotly. This coarseness of his
angered her, and gave her courage. “Surely you must feel how easy it is
for you to insult me?” she said.

“An honest man and an honest woman may be insulted, but to tell a thief
he’s a thief is simply _la constatation d’un fait_.”

“This cruelty is something new I did not know in you.”

“You call it cruelty for a husband to give his wife liberty, giving her
the honorable protection of his name, simply on the condition of
observing the proprieties: is that cruelty?”

“It’s worse than cruel—it’s base, if you want to know!” Anna cried, in
a rush of hatred, and getting up, she was going away.

“No!” he shrieked, in his shrill voice, which pitched a note higher
than usual even, and his big hands clutching her by the arm so
violently that red marks were left from the bracelet he was squeezing,
he forcibly sat her down in her place.

“Base! If you care to use that word, what is base is to forsake husband
and child for a lover, while you eat your husband’s bread!”

She bowed her head. She did not say what she had said the evening
before to her lover, that _he_ was her husband, and her husband was
superfluous; she did not even think that. She felt all the justice of
his words, and only said softly:

“You cannot describe my position as worse than I feel it to be myself;
but what are you saying all this for?”

“What am I saying it for? what for?” he went on, as angrily. “That you
may know that since you have not carried out my wishes in regard to
observing outward decorum, I will take measures to put an end to this
state of things.”

“Soon, very soon, it will end, anyway,” she said; and again, at the
thought of death near at hand and now desired, tears came into her
eyes.

“It will end sooner than you and your lover have planned! If you must
have the satisfaction of animal passion....”

“Alexey Alexandrovitch! I won’t say it’s not generous, but it’s not
like a gentleman to strike anyone who’s down.”

“Yes, you only think of yourself! But the sufferings of a man who was
your husband have no interest for you. You don’t care that his whole
life is ruined, that he is thuff ... thuff....”

Alexey Alexandrovitch was speaking so quickly that he stammered, and
was utterly unable to articulate the word “suffering.” In the end he
pronounced it “thuffering.” She wanted to laugh, and was immediately
ashamed that anything could amuse her at such a moment. And for the
first time, for an instant, she felt for him, put herself in his place,
and was sorry for him. But what could she say or do? Her head sank, and
she sat silent. He too was silent for some time, and then began
speaking in a frigid, less shrill voice, emphasizing random words that
had no special significance.

“I came to tell you....” he said.

She glanced at him. “No, it was my fancy,” she thought, recalling the
expression of his face when he stumbled over the word “suffering.” “No;
can a man with those dull eyes, with that self-satisfied complacency,
feel anything?”

“I cannot change anything,” she whispered.

“I have come to tell you that I am going tomorrow to Moscow, and shall
not return again to this house, and you will receive notice of what I
decide through the lawyer into whose hands I shall intrust the task of
getting a divorce. My son is going to my sister’s,” said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, with an effort recalling what he had meant to say about
his son.

“You take Seryozha to hurt me,” she said, looking at him from under her
brows. “You do not love him.... Leave me Seryozha!”

“Yes, I have lost even my affection for my son, because he is
associated with the repulsion I feel for you. But still I shall take
him. Good-bye!”

And he was going away, but now she detained him.

“Alexey Alexandrovitch, leave me Seryozha!” she whispered once more. “I
have nothing else to say. Leave Seryozha till my ... I shall soon be
confined; leave him!”

Alexey Alexandrovitch flew into a rage, and, snatching his hand from
her, he went out of the room without a word.


Chapter 5

The waiting-room of the celebrated Petersburg lawyer was full when
Alexey Alexandrovitch entered it. Three ladies—an old lady, a young
lady, and a merchant’s wife—and three gentlemen—one a German banker
with a ring on his finger, the second a merchant with a beard, and the
third a wrathful-looking government clerk in official uniform, with a
cross on his neck—had obviously been waiting a long while already. Two
clerks were writing at tables with scratching pens. The appurtenances
of the writing-tables, about which Alexey Alexandrovitch was himself
very fastidious, were exceptionally good. He could not help observing
this. One of the clerks, without getting up, turned wrathfully to
Alexey Alexandrovitch, half closing his eyes. “What are you wanting?”

He replied that he had to see the lawyer on some business.

“He is engaged,” the clerk responded severely, and he pointed with his
pen at the persons waiting, and went on writing.

“Can’t he spare time to see me?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.

“He has no time free; he is always busy. Kindly wait your turn.”

“Then I must trouble you to give him my card,” Alexey Alexandrovitch
said with dignity, seeing the impossibility of preserving his
incognito.

The clerk took the card and, obviously not approving of what he read on
it, went to the door.

Alexey Alexandrovitch was in principle in favor of the publicity of
legal proceedings, though for some higher official considerations he
disliked the application of the principle in Russia, and disapproved of
it, as far as he could disapprove of anything instituted by authority
of the Emperor. His whole life had been spent in administrative work,
and consequently, when he did not approve of anything, his disapproval
was softened by the recognition of the inevitability of mistakes and
the possibility of reform in every department. In the new public law
courts he disliked the restrictions laid on the lawyers conducting
cases. But till then he had had nothing to do with the law courts, and
so had disapproved of their publicity simply in theory; now his
disapprobation was strengthened by the unpleasant impression made on
him in the lawyer’s waiting room.

“Coming immediately,” said the clerk; and two minutes later there did
actually appear in the doorway the large figure of an old solicitor who
had been consulting with the lawyer himself.

The lawyer was a little, squat, bald man, with a dark, reddish beard,
light-colored long eyebrows, and an overhanging brow. He was attired as
though for a wedding, from his cravat to his double watch-chain and
varnished boots. His face was clever and manly, but his dress was
dandified and in bad taste.

“Pray walk in,” said the lawyer, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch; and,
gloomily ushering Karenin in before him, he closed the door.

“Won’t you sit down?” He indicated an armchair at a writing-table
covered with papers. He sat down himself, and, rubbing his little hands
with short fingers covered with white hairs, he bent his head on one
side. But as soon as he was settled in this position a moth flew over
the table. The lawyer, with a swiftness that could never have been
expected of him, opened his hands, caught the moth, and resumed his
former attitude.

“Before beginning to speak of my business,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
following the lawyer’s movements with wondering eyes, “I ought to
observe that the business about which I have to speak to you is to be
strictly private.”

The lawyer’s overhanging reddish mustaches were parted in a scarcely
perceptible smile.

“I should not be a lawyer if I could not keep the secrets confided to
me. But if you would like proof....”

Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at his face, and saw that the shrewd,
gray eyes were laughing, and seemed to know all about it already.

“You know my name?” Alexey Alexandrovitch resumed.

“I know you and the good”—again he caught a moth—“work you are doing,
like every Russian,” said the lawyer, bowing.

Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed, plucking up his courage. But having once
made up his mind he went on in his shrill voice, without timidity—or
hesitation, accentuating here and there a word.

“I have the misfortune,” Alexey Alexandrovitch began, “to have been
deceived in my married life, and I desire to break off all relations
with my wife by legal means—that is, to be divorced, but to do this so
that my son may not remain with his mother.”

The lawyer’s gray eyes tried not to laugh, but they were dancing with
irrepressible glee, and Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that it was not
simply the delight of a man who has just got a profitable job: there
was triumph and joy, there was a gleam like the malignant gleam he saw
in his wife’s eyes.

“You desire my assistance in securing a divorce?”

“Yes, precisely so; but I ought to warn you that I may be wasting your
time and attention. I have come simply to consult you as a preliminary
step. I want a divorce, but the form in which it is possible is of
great consequence to me. It is very possible that if that form does not
correspond with my requirements I may give up a legal divorce.”

“Oh, that’s always the case,” said the lawyer, “and that’s always for
you to decide.”

He let his eyes rest on Alexey Alexandrovitch’s feet, feeling that he
might offend his client by the sight of his irrepressible amusement. He
looked at a moth that flew before his nose, and moved his hands, but
did not catch it from regard for Alexey Alexandrovitch’s position.

“Though in their general features our laws on this subject are known to
me,” pursued Alexey Alexandrovitch, “I should be glad to have an idea
of the forms in which such things are done in practice.”

“You would be glad,” the lawyer, without lifting his eyes, responded,
adopting, with a certain satisfaction, the tone of his client’s
remarks, “for me to lay before you all the methods by which you could
secure what you desire?”

And on receiving an assuring nod from Alexey Alexandrovitch, he went
on, stealing a glance now and then at Alexey Alexandrovitch’s face,
which was growing red in patches.

“Divorce by our laws,” he said, with a slight shade of disapprobation
of our laws, “is possible, as you are aware, in the following cases....
Wait a little!” he called to a clerk who put his head in at the door,
but he got up all the same, said a few words to him, and sat down
again. “... In the following cases: physical defect in the married
parties, desertion without communication for five years,” he said,
crooking a short finger covered with hair, “adultery” (this word he
pronounced with obvious satisfaction), “subdivided as follows” (he
continued to crook his fat fingers, though the three cases and their
subdivisions could obviously not be classified together): “physical
defect of the husband or of the wife, adultery of the husband or of the
wife.” As by now all his fingers were used up, he uncrooked all his
fingers and went on: “This is the theoretical view; but I imagine you
have done me the honor to apply to me in order to learn its application
in practice. And therefore, guided by precedents, I must inform you
that in practice cases of divorce may all be reduced to the
following—there’s no physical defect, I may assume, nor desertion?...”

Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed his head in assent.

“—May be reduced to the following: adultery of one of the married
parties, and the detection in the fact of the guilty party by mutual
agreement, and failing such agreement, accidental detection. It must be
admitted that the latter case is rarely met with in practice,” said the
lawyer, and stealing a glance at Alexey Alexandrovitch he paused, as a
man selling pistols, after enlarging on the advantages of each weapon,
might await his customer’s choice. But Alexey Alexandrovitch said
nothing, and therefore the lawyer went on: “The most usual and simple,
the sensible course, I consider, is adultery by mutual consent. I
should not permit myself to express it so, speaking with a man of no
education,” he said, “but I imagine that to you this is
comprehensible.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch was, however, so perturbed that he did not
immediately comprehend all the good sense of adultery by mutual
consent, and his eyes expressed this uncertainty; but the lawyer
promptly came to his assistance.

“People cannot go on living together—here you have a fact. And if both
are agreed about it, the details and formalities become a matter of no
importance. And at the same time this is the simplest and most certain
method.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch fully understood now. But he had religious
scruples, which hindered the execution of such a plan.

“That is out of the question in the present case,” he said. “Only one
alternative is possible: undesigned detection, supported by letters
which I have.”

At the mention of letters the lawyer pursed up his lips, and gave
utterance to a thin little compassionate and contemptuous sound.

“Kindly consider,” he began, “cases of that kind are, as you are aware,
under ecclesiastical jurisdiction; the reverend fathers are fond of
going into the minutest details in cases of that kind,” he said with a
smile, which betrayed his sympathy with the reverend fathers’ taste.
“Letters may, of course, be a partial confirmation; but detection in
the fact there must be of the most direct kind, that is, by
eyewitnesses. In fact, if you do me the honor to intrust your
confidence to me, you will do well to leave me the choice of the
measures to be employed. If one wants the result, one must admit the
means.”

“If it is so....” Alexey Alexandrovitch began, suddenly turning white;
but at that moment the lawyer rose and again went to the door to speak
to the intruding clerk.

“Tell her we don’t haggle over fees!” he said, and returned to Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

On his way back he caught unobserved another moth. “Nice state my rep
curtains will be in by the summer!” he thought, frowning.

“And so you were saying?...” he said.

“I will communicate my decision to you by letter,” said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, getting up, and he clutched at the table. After
standing a moment in silence, he said: “From your words I may
consequently conclude that a divorce may be obtained? I would ask you
to let me know what are your terms.”

“It may be obtained if you give me complete liberty of action,” said
the lawyer, not answering his question. “When can I reckon on receiving
information from you?” he asked, moving towards the door, his eyes and
his varnished boots shining.

“In a week’s time. Your answer as to whether you will undertake to
conduct the case, and on what terms, you will be so good as to
communicate to me.”

“Very good.”

The lawyer bowed respectfully, let his client out of the door, and,
left alone, gave himself up to his sense of amusement. He felt so
mirthful that, contrary to his rules, he made a reduction in his terms
to the haggling lady, and gave up catching moths, finally deciding that
next winter he must have the furniture covered with velvet, like
Sigonin’s.


Chapter 6

Alexey Alexandrovitch had gained a brilliant victory at the sitting of
the Commission of the 17th of August, but in the sequel this victory
cut the ground from under his feet. The new commission for the inquiry
into the condition of the native tribes in all its branches had been
formed and despatched to its destination with an unusual speed and
energy inspired by Alexey Alexandrovitch. Within three months a report
was presented. The condition of the native tribes was investigated in
its political, administrative, economic, ethnographic, material, and
religious aspects. To all these questions there were answers admirably
stated, and answers admitting no shade of doubt, since they were not a
product of human thought, always liable to error, but were all the
product of official activity. The answers were all based on official
data furnished by governors and heads of churches, and founded on the
reports of district magistrates and ecclesiastical superintendents,
founded in their turn on the reports of parochial overseers and parish
priests; and so all of these answers were unhesitating and certain. All
such questions as, for instance, of the cause of failure of crops, of
the adherence of certain tribes to their ancient beliefs,
etc.—questions which, but for the convenient intervention of the
official machine, are not, and cannot be solved for ages—received full,
unhesitating solution. And this solution was in favor of Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s contention. But Stremov, who had felt stung to the
quick at the last sitting, had, on the reception of the commission’s
report, resorted to tactics which Alexey Alexandrovitch had not
anticipated. Stremov, carrying with him several members, went over to
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s side, and not contenting himself with warmly
defending the measure proposed by Karenin, proposed other more extreme
measures in the same direction. These measures, still further
exaggerated in opposition to what was Alexey Alexandrovitch’s
fundamental idea, were passed by the commission, and then the aim of
Stremov’s tactics became apparent. Carried to an extreme, the measures
seemed at once to be so absurd that the highest authorities, and public
opinion, and intellectual ladies, and the newspapers, all at the same
time fell foul of them, expressing their indignation both with the
measures and their nominal father, Alexey Alexandrovitch. Stremov drew
back, affecting to have blindly followed Karenin, and to be astounded
and distressed at what had been done. This meant the defeat of Alexey
Alexandrovitch. But in spite of failing health, in spite of his
domestic griefs, he did not give in. There was a split in the
commission. Some members, with Stremov at their head, justified their
mistake on the ground that they had put faith in the commission of
revision, instituted by Alexey Alexandrovitch, and maintained that the
report of the commission was rubbish, and simply so much waste paper.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, with a following of those who saw the danger of
so revolutionary an attitude to official documents, persisted in
upholding the statements obtained by the revising commission. In
consequence of this, in the higher spheres, and even in society, all
was chaos, and although everyone was interested, no one could tell
whether the native tribes really were becoming impoverished and ruined,
or whether they were in a flourishing condition. The position of Alexey
Alexandrovitch, owing to this, and partly owing to the contempt
lavished on him for his wife’s infidelity, became very precarious. And
in this position he took an important resolution. To the astonishment
of the commission, he announced that he should ask permission to go
himself to investigate the question on the spot. And having obtained
permission, Alexey Alexandrovitch prepared to set off to these remote
provinces.

Alexey Alexandrovitch’s departure made a great sensation, the more so
as just before he started he officially returned the posting-fares
allowed him for twelve horses, to drive to his destination.

“I think it very noble,” Betsy said about this to the Princess Myakaya.
“Why take money for posting-horses when everyone knows that there are
railways everywhere now?”

But Princess Myakaya did not agree, and the Princess Tverskaya’s
opinion annoyed her indeed.

“It’s all very well for you to talk,” said she, “when you have I don’t
know how many millions; but I am very glad when my husband goes on a
revising tour in the summer. It’s very good for him and pleasant
traveling about, and it’s a settled arrangement for me to keep a
carriage and coachman on the money.”

On his way to the remote provinces Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped for
three days at Moscow.

The day after his arrival he was driving back from calling on the
governor-general. At the crossroads by Gazetoy Place, where there are
always crowds of carriages and sledges, Alexey Alexandrovitch suddenly
heard his name called out in such a loud and cheerful voice that he
could not help looking round. At the corner of the pavement, in a
short, stylish overcoat and a low-crowned fashionable hat, jauntily
askew, with a smile that showed a gleam of white teeth and red lips,
stood Stepan Arkadyevitch, radiant, young, and beaming. He called him
vigorously and urgently, and insisted on his stopping. He had one arm
on the window of a carriage that was stopping at the corner, and out of
the window were thrust the heads of a lady in a velvet hat, and two
children. Stepan Arkadyevitch was smiling and beckoning to his
brother-in-law. The lady smiled a kindly smile too, and she too waved
her hand to Alexey Alexandrovitch. It was Dolly with her children.

Alexey Alexandrovitch did not want to see anyone in Moscow, and least
of all his wife’s brother. He raised his hat and would have driven on,
but Stepan Arkadyevitch told his coachman to stop, and ran across the
snow to him.

“Well, what a shame not to have let us know! Been here long? I was at
Dussots’ yesterday and saw ‘Karenin’ on the visitors’ list, but it
never entered my head that it was you,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
sticking his head in at the window of the carriage, “or I should have
looked you up. I am glad to see you!” he said, knocking one foot
against the other to shake the snow off. “What a shame of you not to
let us know!” he repeated.

“I had no time; I am very busy,” Alexey Alexandrovitch responded dryly.

“Come to my wife, she does so want to see you.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch unfolded the rug in which his frozen feet were
wrapped, and getting out of his carriage made his way over the snow to
Darya Alexandrovna.

“Why, Alexey Alexandrovitch, what are you cutting us like this for?”
said Dolly, smiling.

“I was very busy. Delighted to see you!” he said in a tone clearly
indicating that he was annoyed by it. “How are you?”

“Tell me, how is my darling Anna?”

Alexey Alexandrovitch mumbled something and would have gone on. But
Stepan Arkadyevitch stopped him.

“I tell you what we’ll do tomorrow. Dolly, ask him to dinner. We’ll ask
Koznishev and Pestsov, so as to entertain him with our Moscow
celebrities.”

“Yes, please, do come,” said Dolly; “we will expect you at five, or six
o’clock, if you like. How is my darling Anna? How long....”

“She is quite well,” Alexey Alexandrovitch mumbled, frowning.
“Delighted!” and he moved away towards his carriage.

“You will come?” Dolly called after him.

Alexey Alexandrovitch said something which Dolly could not catch in the
noise of the moving carriages.

“I shall come round tomorrow!” Stepan Arkadyevitch shouted to him.

Alexey Alexandrovitch got into his carriage, and buried himself in it
so as neither to see nor be seen.

“Queer fish!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch to his wife, and glancing at his
watch, he made a motion of his hand before his face, indicating a
caress to his wife and children, and walked jauntily along the
pavement.

“Stiva! Stiva!” Dolly called, reddening.

He turned round.

“I must get coats, you know, for Grisha and Tanya. Give me the money.”

“Never mind; you tell them I’ll pay the bill!” and he vanished, nodding
genially to an acquaintance who drove by.


Chapter 7

The next day was Sunday. Stepan Arkadyevitch went to the Grand Theater
to a rehearsal of the ballet, and gave Masha Tchibisova, a pretty
dancing-girl whom he had just taken under his protection, the coral
necklace he had promised her the evening before, and behind the scenes
in the dim daylight of the theater, managed to kiss her pretty little
face, radiant over her present. Besides the gift of the necklace he
wanted to arrange with her about meeting after the ballet. After
explaining that he could not come at the beginning of the ballet, he
promised he would come for the last act and take her to supper. From
the theater Stepan Arkadyevitch drove to Ohotny Row, selected himself
the fish and asparagus for dinner, and by twelve o’clock was at
Dussots’, where he had to see three people, luckily all staying at the
same hotel: Levin, who had recently come back from abroad and was
staying there; the new head of his department, who had just been
promoted to that position, and had come on a tour of revision to
Moscow; and his brother-in-law, Karenin, whom he must see, so as to be
sure of bringing him to dinner.

Stepan Arkadyevitch liked dining, but still better he liked to give a
dinner, small, but very choice, both as regards the food and drink and
as regards the selection of guests. He particularly liked the program
of that day’s dinner. There would be fresh perch, asparagus, and _la
pièce de resistance_—first-rate, but quite plain, roast beef, and wines
to suit: so much for the eating and drinking. Kitty and Levin would be
of the party, and that this might not be obtrusively evident, there
would be a girl cousin too, and young Shtcherbatsky, and _la pièce de
resistance_ among the guests—Sergey Koznishev and Alexey
Alexandrovitch. Sergey Ivanovitch was a Moscow man, and a philosopher;
Alexey Alexandrovitch a Petersburger, and a practical politician. He
was asking, too, the well-known eccentric enthusiast, Pestsov, a
liberal, a great talker, a musician, an historian, and the most
delightfully youthful person of fifty, who would be a sauce or garnish
for Koznishev and Karenin. He would provoke them and set them off.

The second installment for the forest had been received from the
merchant and was not yet exhausted; Dolly had been very amiable and
good-humored of late, and the idea of the dinner pleased Stepan
Arkadyevitch from every point of view. He was in the most light-hearted
mood. There were two circumstances a little unpleasant, but these two
circumstances were drowned in the sea of good-humored gaiety which
flooded the soul of Stepan Arkadyevitch. These two circumstances were:
first, that on meeting Alexey Alexandrovitch the day before in the
street he had noticed that he was cold and reserved with him, and
putting the expression of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s face and the fact
that he had not come to see them or let them know of his arrival with
the rumors he had heard about Anna and Vronsky, Stepan Arkadyevitch
guessed that something was wrong between the husband and wife.

That was one disagreeable thing. The other slightly disagreeable fact
was that the new head of his department, like all new heads, had the
reputation already of a terrible person, who got up at six o’clock in
the morning, worked like a horse, and insisted on his subordinates
working in the same way. Moreover, this new head had the further
reputation of being a bear in his manners, and was, according to all
reports, a man of a class in all respects the opposite of that to which
his predecessor had belonged, and to which Stepan Arkadyevitch had
hitherto belonged himself. On the previous day Stepan Arkadyevitch had
appeared at the office in a uniform, and the new chief had been very
affable and had talked to him as to an acquaintance. Consequently
Stepan Arkadyevitch deemed it his duty to call upon him in his
non-official dress. The thought that the new chief might not tender him
a warm reception was the other unpleasant thing. But Stepan
Arkadyevitch instinctively felt that everything would _come round_ all
right. “They’re all people, all men, like us poor sinners; why be nasty
and quarrelsome?” he thought as he went into the hotel.

“Good-day, Vassily,” he said, walking into the corridor with his hat
cocked on one side, and addressing a footman he knew; “why, you’ve let
your whiskers grow! Levin, number seven, eh? Take me up, please. And
find out whether Count Anitchkin” (this was the new head) “is
receiving.”

“Yes, sir,” Vassily responded, smiling. “You’ve not been to see us for
a long while.”

“I was here yesterday, but at the other entrance. Is this number
seven?”

Levin was standing with a peasant from Tver in the middle of the room,
measuring a fresh bearskin, when Stepan Arkadyevitch went in.

“What! you killed him?” cried Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Well done! A
she-bear? How are you, Arhip!”

He shook hands with the peasant and sat down on the edge of a chair,
without taking off his coat and hat.

“Come, take off your coat and stay a little,” said Levin, taking his
hat.

“No, I haven’t time; I’ve only looked in for a tiny second,” answered
Stepan Arkadyevitch. He threw open his coat, but afterwards did take it
off, and sat on for a whole hour, talking to Levin about hunting and
the most intimate subjects.

“Come, tell me, please, what you did abroad? Where have you been?” said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, when the peasant had gone.

“Oh, I stayed in Germany, in Prussia, in France, and in England—not in
the capitals, but in the manufacturing towns, and saw a great deal that
was new to me. And I’m glad I went.”

“Yes, I knew your idea of the solution of the labor question.”

“Not a bit: in Russia there can be no labor question. In Russia the
question is that of the relation of the working people to the land;
though the question exists there too—but there it’s a matter of
repairing what’s been ruined, while with us....”

Stepan Arkadyevitch listened attentively to Levin.

“Yes, yes!” he said, “it’s very possible you’re right. But I’m glad
you’re in good spirits, and are hunting bears, and working, and
interested. Shtcherbatsky told me another story—he met you—that you
were in such a depressed state, talking of nothing but death....”

“Well, what of it? I’ve not given up thinking of death,” said Levin.
“It’s true that it’s high time I was dead; and that all this is
nonsense. It’s the truth I’m telling you. I do value my idea and my
work awfully; but in reality only consider this: all this world of ours
is nothing but a speck of mildew, which has grown up on a tiny planet.
And for us to suppose we can have something great—ideas, work—it’s all
dust and ashes.”

“But all that’s as old as the hills, my boy!”

“It is old; but do you know, when you grasp this fully, then somehow
everything becomes of no consequence. When you understand that you will
die tomorrow, if not today, and nothing will be left, then everything
is so unimportant! And I consider my idea very important, but it turns
out really to be as unimportant too, even if it were carried out, as
doing for that bear. So one goes on living, amusing oneself with
hunting, with work—anything so as not to think of death!”

Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled a subtle affectionate smile as he listened
to Levin.

“Well, of course! Here you’ve come round to my point. Do you remember
you attacked me for seeking enjoyment in life? Don’t be so severe, O
moralist!”

“No; all the same, what’s fine in life is....” Levin hesitated—“oh, I
don’t know. All I know is that we shall soon be dead.”

“Why so soon?”

“And do you know, there’s less charm in life, when one thinks of death,
but there’s more peace.”

“On the contrary, the finish is always the best. But I must be going,”
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting up for the tenth time.

“Oh, no, stay a bit!” said Levin, keeping him. “Now, when shall we see
each other again? I’m going tomorrow.”

“I’m a nice person! Why, that’s just what I came for! You simply must
come to dinner with us today. Your brother’s coming, and Karenin, my
brother-in-law.”

“You don’t mean to say he’s here?” said Levin, and he wanted to inquire
about Kitty. He had heard at the beginning of the winter that she was
at Petersburg with her sister, the wife of the diplomat, and he did not
know whether she had come back or not; but he changed his mind and did
not ask. “Whether she’s coming or not, I don’t care,” he said to
himself.

“So you’ll come?”

“Of course.”

“At five o’clock, then, and not evening dress.”

And Stepan Arkadyevitch got up and went down below to the new head of
his department. Instinct had not misled Stepan Arkadyevitch. The
terrible new head turned out to be an extremely amenable person, and
Stepan Arkadyevitch lunched with him and stayed on, so that it was four
o’clock before he got to Alexey Alexandrovitch.


Chapter 8

Alexey Alexandrovitch, on coming back from church service, had spent
the whole morning indoors. He had two pieces of business before him
that morning; first, to receive and send on a deputation from the
native tribes which was on its way to Petersburg, and now at Moscow;
secondly, to write the promised letter to the lawyer. The deputation,
though it had been summoned at Alexey Alexandrovitch’s instigation, was
not without its discomforting and even dangerous aspect, and he was
glad he had found it in Moscow. The members of this deputation had not
the slightest conception of their duty and the part they were to play.
They naïvely believed that it was their business to lay before the
commission their needs and the actual condition of things, and to ask
assistance of the government, and utterly failed to grasp that some of
their statements and requests supported the contention of the enemy’s
side, and so spoiled the whole business. Alexey Alexandrovitch was
busily engaged with them for a long while, drew up a program for them
from which they were not to depart, and on dismissing them wrote a
letter to Petersburg for the guidance of the deputation. He had his
chief support in this affair in the Countess Lidia Ivanovna. She was a
specialist in the matter of deputations, and no one knew better than
she how to manage them, and put them in the way they should go. Having
completed this task, Alexey Alexandrovitch wrote the letter to the
lawyer. Without the slightest hesitation he gave him permission to act
as he might judge best. In the letter he enclosed three of Vronsky’s
notes to Anna, which were in the portfolio he had taken away.

Since Alexey Alexandrovitch had left home with the intention of not
returning to his family again, and since he had been at the lawyer’s
and had spoken, though only to one man, of his intention, since
especially he had translated the matter from the world of real life to
the world of ink and paper, he had grown more and more used to his own
intention, and by now distinctly perceived the feasibility of its
execution.

He was sealing the envelope to the lawyer, when he heard the loud tones
of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s voice. Stepan Arkadyevitch was disputing with
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s servant, and insisting on being announced.

“No matter,” thought Alexey Alexandrovitch, “so much the better. I will
inform him at once of my position in regard to his sister, and explain
why it is I can’t dine with him.”

“Come in!” he said aloud, collecting his papers, and putting them in
the blotting-paper.

“There, you see, you’re talking nonsense, and he’s at home!” responded
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s voice, addressing the servant, who had refused to
let him in, and taking off his coat as he went, Oblonsky walked into
the room. “Well, I’m awfully glad I’ve found you! So I hope....” Stepan
Arkadyevitch began cheerfully.

“I cannot come,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said coldly, standing and not
asking his visitor to sit down.

Alexey Alexandrovitch had thought to pass at once into those frigid
relations in which he ought to stand with the brother of a wife against
whom he was beginning a suit for divorce. But he had not taken into
account the ocean of kindliness brimming over in the heart of Stepan
Arkadyevitch.

Stepan Arkadyevitch opened wide his clear, shining eyes.

“Why can’t you? What do you mean?” he asked in perplexity, speaking in
French. “Oh, but it’s a promise. And we’re all counting on you.”

“I want to tell you that I can’t dine at your house, because the terms
of relationship which have existed between us must cease.”

“How? How do you mean? What for?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with a
smile.

“Because I am beginning an action for divorce against your sister, my
wife. I ought to have....”

But, before Alexey Alexandrovitch had time to finish his sentence,
Stepan Arkadyevitch was behaving not at all as he had expected. He
groaned and sank into an armchair.

“No, Alexey Alexandrovitch! What are you saying?” cried Oblonsky, and
his suffering was apparent in his face.

“It is so.”

“Excuse me, I can’t, I can’t believe it!”

Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, feeling that his words had not had the
effect he anticipated, and that it would be unavoidable for him to
explain his position, and that, whatever explanations he might make,
his relations with his brother-in-law would remain unchanged.

“Yes, I am brought to the painful necessity of seeking a divorce,” he
said.

“I will say one thing, Alexey Alexandrovitch. I know you for an
excellent, upright man; I know Anna—excuse me, I can’t change my
opinion of her—for a good, an excellent woman; and so, excuse me, I
cannot believe it. There is some misunderstanding,” said he.

“Oh, if it were merely a misunderstanding!...”

“Pardon, I understand,” interposed Stepan Arkadyevitch. “But of
course.... One thing: you must not act in haste. You must not, you must
not act in haste!”

“I am not acting in haste,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said coldly, “but one
cannot ask advice of anyone in such a matter. I have quite made up my
mind.”

“This is awful!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “I would do one thing,
Alexey Alexandrovitch. I beseech you, do it!” he said. “No action has
yet been taken, if I understand rightly. Before you take advice, see my
wife, talk to her. She loves Anna like a sister, she loves you, and
she’s a wonderful woman. For God’s sake, talk to her! Do me that favor,
I beseech you!”

Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and Stepan Arkadyevitch looked at him
sympathetically, without interrupting his silence.

“You will go to see her?”

“I don’t know. That was just why I have not been to see you. I imagine
our relations must change.”

“Why so? I don’t see that. Allow me to believe that apart from our
connection you have for me, at least in part, the same friendly feeling
I have always had for you ... and sincere esteem,” said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, pressing his hand. “Even if your worst suppositions were
correct, I don’t—and never would—take on myself to judge either side,
and I see no reason why our relations should be affected. But now, do
this, come and see my wife.”

“Well, we look at the matter differently,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch
coldly. “However, we won’t discuss it.”

“No; why shouldn’t you come today to dine, anyway? My wife’s expecting
you. Please, do come. And, above all, talk it over with her. She’s a
wonderful woman. For God’s sake, on my knees, I implore you!”

“If you so much wish it, I will come,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
sighing.

And, anxious to change the conversation, he inquired about what
interested them both—the new head of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s department,
a man not yet old, who had suddenly been promoted to so high a
position.

Alexey Alexandrovitch had previously felt no liking for Count
Anitchkin, and had always differed from him in his opinions. But now,
from a feeling readily comprehensible to officials—that hatred felt by
one who has suffered a defeat in the service for one who has received a
promotion, he could not endure him.

“Well, have you seen him?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch with a malignant
smile.

“Of course; he was at our sitting yesterday. He seems to know his work
capitally, and to be very energetic.”

“Yes, but what is his energy directed to?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“Is he aiming at doing anything, or simply undoing what’s been done?
It’s the great misfortune of our government—this paper administration,
of which he’s a worthy representative.”

“Really, I don’t know what fault one could find with him. His policy I
don’t know, but one thing—he’s a very nice fellow,” answered Stepan
Arkadyevitch. “I’ve just been seeing him, and he’s really a capital
fellow. We lunched together, and I taught him how to make, you know
that drink, wine and oranges. It’s so cooling. And it’s a wonder he
didn’t know it. He liked it awfully. No, really he’s a capital fellow.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch glanced at his watch.

“Why, good heavens, it’s four already, and I’ve still to go to
Dolgovushin’s! So please come round to dinner. You can’t imagine how
you will grieve my wife and me.”

The way in which Alexey Alexandrovitch saw his brother-in-law out was
very different from the manner in which he had met him.

“I’ve promised, and I’ll come,” he answered wearily.

“Believe me, I appreciate it, and I hope you won’t regret it,” answered
Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.

And, putting on his coat as he went, he patted the footman on the head,
chuckled, and went out.

“At five o’clock, and not evening dress, please,” he shouted once more,
turning at the door.


Chapter 9

It was past five, and several guests had already arrived, before the
host himself got home. He went in together with Sergey Ivanovitch
Koznishev and Pestsov, who had reached the street door at the same
moment. These were the two leading representatives of the Moscow
intellectuals, as Oblonsky had called them. Both were men respected for
their character and their intelligence. They respected each other, but
were in complete and hopeless disagreement upon almost every subject,
not because they belonged to opposite parties, but precisely because
they were of the same party (their enemies refused to see any
distinction between their views); but, in that party, each had his own
special shade of opinion. And since no difference is less easily
overcome than the difference of opinion about semi-abstract questions,
they never agreed in any opinion, and had long, indeed, been accustomed
to jeer without anger, each at the other’s incorrigible aberrations.

They were just going in at the door, talking of the weather, when
Stepan Arkadyevitch overtook them. In the drawing-room there were
already sitting Prince Alexander Dmitrievitch Shtcherbatsky, young
Shtcherbatsky, Turovtsin, Kitty, and Karenin.

Stepan Arkadyevitch saw immediately that things were not going well in
the drawing-room without him. Darya Alexandrovna, in her best gray silk
gown, obviously worried about the children, who were to have their
dinner by themselves in the nursery, and by her husband’s absence, was
not equal to the task of making the party mix without him. All were
sitting like so many priests’ wives on a visit (so the old prince
expressed it), obviously wondering why they were there, and pumping up
remarks simply to avoid being silent. Turovtsin—good, simple man—felt
unmistakably a fish out of water, and the smile with which his thick
lips greeted Stepan Arkadyevitch said, as plainly as words: “Well, old
boy, you have popped me down in a learned set! A drinking party now, or
the _Château des Fleurs_, would be more in my line!” The old prince sat
in silence, his bright little eyes watching Karenin from one side, and
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw that he had already formed a phrase to sum up
that politician of whom guests were invited to partake as though he
were a sturgeon. Kitty was looking at the door, calling up all her
energies to keep her from blushing at the entrance of Konstantin Levin.
Young Shtcherbatsky, who had not been introduced to Karenin, was trying
to look as though he were not in the least conscious of it. Karenin
himself had followed the Petersburg fashion for a dinner with ladies
and was wearing evening dress and a white tie. Stepan Arkadyevitch saw
by his face that he had come simply to keep his promise, and was
performing a disagreeable duty in being present at this gathering. He
was indeed the person chiefly responsible for the chill benumbing all
the guests before Stepan Arkadyevitch came in.

On entering the drawing-room Stepan Arkadyevitch apologized, explaining
that he had been detained by that prince, who was always the scapegoat
for all his absences and unpunctualities, and in one moment he had made
all the guests acquainted with each other, and, bringing together
Alexey Alexandrovitch and Sergey Koznishev, started them on a
discussion of the Russification of Poland, into which they immediately
plunged with Pestsov. Slapping Turovtsin on the shoulder, he whispered
something comic in his ear, and set him down by his wife and the old
prince. Then he told Kitty she was looking very pretty that evening,
and presented Shtcherbatsky to Karenin. In a moment he had so kneaded
together the social dough that the drawing-room became very lively, and
there was a merry buzz of voices. Konstantin Levin was the only person
who had not arrived. But this was so much the better, as going into the
dining-room, Stepan Arkadyevitch found to his horror that the port and
sherry had been procured from Depré, and not from Levy, and, directing
that the coachman should be sent off as speedily as possible to Levy’s,
he was going back to the drawing-room.

In the dining-room he was met by Konstantin Levin.

“I’m not late?”

“You can never help being late!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, taking his
arm.

“Have you a lot of people? Who’s here?” asked Levin, unable to help
blushing, as he knocked the snow off his cap with his glove.

“All our own set. Kitty’s here. Come along, I’ll introduce you to
Karenin.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch, for all his liberal views, was well aware that to
meet Karenin was sure to be felt a flattering distinction, and so
treated his best friends to this honor. But at that instant Konstantin
Levin was not in a condition to feel all the gratification of making
such an acquaintance. He had not seen Kitty since that memorable
evening when he met Vronsky, not counting, that is, the moment when he
had had a glimpse of her on the highroad. He had known at the bottom of
his heart that he would see her here today. But to keep his thoughts
free, he had tried to persuade himself that he did not know it. Now
when he heard that she was here, he was suddenly conscious of such
delight, and at the same time of such dread, that his breath failed him
and he could not utter what he wanted to say.

“What is she like, what is she like? Like what she used to be, or like
what she was in the carriage? What if Darya Alexandrovna told the
truth? Why shouldn’t it be the truth?” he thought.

“Oh, please, introduce me to Karenin,” he brought out with an effort,
and with a desperately determined step he walked into the drawing-room
and beheld her.

She was not the same as she used to be, nor was she as she had been in
the carriage; she was quite different.

She was scared, shy, shame-faced, and still more charming from it. She
saw him the very instant he walked into the room. She had been
expecting him. She was delighted, and so confused at her own delight
that there was a moment, the moment when he went up to her sister and
glanced again at her, when she, and he, and Dolly, who saw it all,
thought she would break down and would begin to cry. She crimsoned,
turned white, crimsoned again, and grew faint, waiting with quivering
lips for him to come to her. He went up to her, bowed, and held out his
hand without speaking. Except for the slight quiver of her lips and the
moisture in her eyes that made them brighter, her smile was almost calm
as she said:

“How long it is since we’ve seen each other!” and with desperate
determination she pressed his hand with her cold hand.

“You’ve not seen me, but I’ve seen you,” said Levin, with a radiant
smile of happiness. “I saw you when you were driving from the railway
station to Ergushovo.”

“When?” she asked, wondering.

“You were driving to Ergushovo,” said Levin, feeling as if he would sob
with the rapture that was flooding his heart. “And how dared I
associate a thought of anything not innocent with this touching
creature? And, yes, I do believe it’s true what Darya Alexandrovna told
me,” he thought.

Stepan Arkadyevitch took him by the arm and led him away to Karenin.

“Let me introduce you.” He mentioned their names.

“Very glad to meet you again,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch coldly,
shaking hands with Levin.

“You are acquainted?” Stepan Arkadyevitch asked in surprise.

“We spent three hours together in the train,” said Levin smiling, “but
got out, just as in a masquerade, quite mystified—at least I was.”

“Nonsense! Come along, please,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pointing in
the direction of the dining-room.

The men went into the dining-room and went up to a table, laid with six
sorts of spirits and as many kinds of cheese, some with little silver
spades and some without, caviar, herrings, preserves of various kinds,
and plates with slices of French bread.

The men stood round the strong-smelling spirits and salt delicacies,
and the discussion of the Russification of Poland between Koznishev,
Karenin, and Pestsov died down in anticipation of dinner.

Sergey Ivanovitch was unequaled in his skill in winding up the most
heated and serious argument by some unexpected pinch of Attic salt that
changed the disposition of his opponent. He did this now.

Alexey Alexandrovitch had been maintaining that the Russification of
Poland could only be accomplished as a result of larger measures which
ought to be introduced by the Russian government.

Pestsov insisted that one country can only absorb another when it is
the more densely populated.

Koznishev admitted both points, but with limitations. As they were
going out of the drawing-room to conclude the argument, Koznishev said,
smiling:

“So, then, for the Russification of our foreign populations there is
but one method—to bring up as many children as one can. My brother and
I are terribly in fault, I see. You married men, especially you, Stepan
Arkadyevitch, are the real patriots: what number have you reached?” he
said, smiling genially at their host and holding out a tiny wine-glass
to him.

Everyone laughed, and Stepan Arkadyevitch with particular good humor.

“Oh, yes, that’s the best method!” he said, munching cheese and filling
the wine-glass with a special sort of spirit. The conversation dropped
at the jest.

“This cheese is not bad. Shall I give you some?” said the master of the
house. “Why, have you been going in for gymnastics again?” he asked
Levin, pinching his muscle with his left hand. Levin smiled, bent his
arm, and under Stepan Arkadyevitch’s fingers the muscles swelled up
like a sound cheese, hard as a knob of iron, through the fine cloth of
the coat.

“What biceps! A perfect Samson!”

“I imagine great strength is needed for hunting bears,” observed Alexey
Alexandrovitch, who had the mistiest notions about the chase. He cut
off and spread with cheese a wafer of bread fine as a spider-web.

Levin smiled.

“Not at all. Quite the contrary; a child can kill a bear,” he said,
with a slight bow moving aside for the ladies, who were approaching the
table.

“You have killed a bear, I’ve been told!” said Kitty, trying
assiduously to catch with her fork a perverse mushroom that would slip
away, and setting the lace quivering over her white arm. “Are there
bears on your place?” she added, turning her charming little head to
him and smiling.

There was apparently nothing extraordinary in what she said, but what
unutterable meaning there was for him in every sound, in every turn of
her lips, her eyes, her hand as she said it! There was entreaty for
forgiveness, and trust in him, and tenderness—soft, timid
tenderness—and promise and hope and love for him, which he could not
but believe in and which choked him with happiness.

“No, we’ve been hunting in the Tver province. It was coming back from
there that I met your _beau-frère_ in the train, or your _beau-frère’s_
brother-in-law,” he said with a smile. “It was an amusing meeting.”

And he began telling with droll good-humor how, after not sleeping all
night, he had, wearing an old fur-lined, full-skirted coat, got into
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s compartment.

“The conductor, forgetting the proverb, would have chucked me out on
account of my attire; but thereupon I began expressing my feelings in
elevated language, and ... you, too,” he said, addressing Karenin and
forgetting his name, “at first would have ejected me on the ground of
the old coat, but afterwards you took my part, for which I am extremely
grateful.”

“The rights of passengers generally to choose their seats are too
ill-defined,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, rubbing the tips of his
fingers on his handkerchief.

“I saw you were in uncertainty about me,” said Levin, smiling
good-naturedly, “but I made haste to plunge into intellectual
conversation to smooth over the defects of my attire.” Sergey
Ivanovitch, while he kept up a conversation with their hostess, had one
ear for his brother, and he glanced askance at him. “What is the matter
with him today? Why such a conquering hero?” he thought. He did not
know that Levin was feeling as though he had grown wings. Levin knew
she was listening to his words and that she was glad to listen to him.
And this was the only thing that interested him. Not in that room only,
but in the whole world, there existed for him only himself, with
enormously increased importance and dignity in his own eyes, and she.
He felt himself on a pinnacle that made him giddy, and far away down
below were all those nice excellent Karenins, Oblonskys, and all the
world.

Quite without attracting notice, without glancing at them, as though
there were no other places left, Stepan Arkadyevitch put Levin and
Kitty side by side.

“Oh, you may as well sit there,” he said to Levin.

The dinner was as choice as the china, in which Stepan Arkadyevitch was
a connoisseur. The _soupe Marie-Louise_ was a splendid success; the
tiny pies eaten with it melted in the mouth and were irreproachable.
The two footmen and Matvey, in white cravats, did their duty with the
dishes and wines unobtrusively, quietly, and swiftly. On the material
side the dinner was a success; it was no less so on the immaterial. The
conversation, at times general and at times between individuals, never
paused, and towards the end the company was so lively that the men rose
from the table, without stopping speaking, and even Alexey
Alexandrovitch thawed.


Chapter 10

Pestsov liked thrashing an argument out to the end, and was not
satisfied with Sergey Ivanovitch’s words, especially as he felt the
injustice of his view.

“I did not mean,” he said over the soup, addressing Alexey
Alexandrovitch, “mere density of population alone, but in conjunction
with fundamental ideas, and not by means of principles.”

“It seems to me,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said languidly, and with no
haste, “that that’s the same thing. In my opinion, influence over
another people is only possible to the people which has the higher
development, which....”

“But that’s just the question,” Pestsov broke in in his bass. He was
always in a hurry to speak, and seemed always to put his whole soul
into what he was saying. “In what are we to make higher development
consist? The English, the French, the Germans, which is at the highest
stage of development? Which of them will nationalize the other? We see
the Rhine provinces have been turned French, but the Germans are not at
a lower stage!” he shouted. “There is another law at work there.”

“I fancy that the greater influence is always on the side of true
civilization,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, slightly lifting his
eyebrows.

“But what are we to lay down as the outward signs of true
civilization?” said Pestsov.

“I imagine such signs are generally very well known,” said Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

“But are they fully known?” Sergey Ivanovitch put in with a subtle
smile. “It is the accepted view now that real culture must be purely
classical; but we see most intense disputes on each side of the
question, and there is no denying that the opposite camp has strong
points in its favor.”

“You are for classics, Sergey Ivanovitch. Will you take red wine?” said
Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“I am not expressing my own opinion of either form of culture,” Sergey
Ivanovitch said, holding out his glass with a smile of condescension,
as to a child. “I only say that both sides have strong arguments to
support them,” he went on, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch. “My
sympathies are classical from education, but in this discussion I am
personally unable to arrive at a conclusion. I see no distinct grounds
for classical studies being given a preeminence over scientific
studies.”

“The natural sciences have just as great an educational value,” put in
Pestsov. “Take astronomy, take botany, or zoology with its system of
general principles.”

“I cannot quite agree with that,” responded Alexey Alexandrovitch “It
seems to me that one must admit that the very process of studying the
forms of language has a peculiarly favorable influence on intellectual
development. Moreover, it cannot be denied that the influence of the
classical authors is in the highest degree moral, while, unfortunately,
with the study of the natural sciences are associated the false and
noxious doctrines which are the curse of our day.”

Sergey Ivanovitch would have said something, but Pestsov interrupted
him in his rich bass. He began warmly contesting the justice of this
view. Sergey Ivanovitch waited serenely to speak, obviously with a
convincing reply ready.

“But,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling subtly, and addressing Karenin,
“One must allow that to weigh all the advantages and disadvantages of
classical and scientific studies is a difficult task, and the question
which form of education was to be preferred would not have been so
quickly and conclusively decided if there had not been in favor of
classical education, as you expressed it just now, its moral—_disons le
mot_—anti-nihilist influence.”

“Undoubtedly.”

“If it had not been for the distinctive property of anti-nihilistic
influence on the side of classical studies, we should have considered
the subject more, have weighed the arguments on both sides,” said
Sergey Ivanovitch with a subtle smile, “we should have given elbow-room
to both tendencies. But now we know that these little pills of
classical learning possess the medicinal property of anti-nihilism, and
we boldly prescribe them to our patients.... But what if they had no
such medicinal property?” he wound up humorously.

At Sergey Ivanovitch’s little pills, everyone laughed; Turovtsin in
especial roared loudly and jovially, glad at last to have found
something to laugh at, all he ever looked for in listening to
conversation.

Stepan Arkadyevitch had not made a mistake in inviting Pestsov. With
Pestsov intellectual conversation never flagged for an instant.
Directly Sergey Ivanovitch had concluded the conversation with his
jest, Pestsov promptly started a new one.

“I can’t agree even,” said he, “that the government had that aim. The
government obviously is guided by abstract considerations, and remains
indifferent to the influence its measures may exercise. The education
of women, for instance, would naturally be regarded as likely to be
harmful, but the government opens schools and universities for women.”

And the conversation at once passed to the new subject of the education
of women.

Alexey Alexandrovitch expressed the idea that the education of women is
apt to be confounded with the emancipation of women, and that it is
only so that it can be considered dangerous.

“I consider, on the contrary, that the two questions are inseparably
connected together,” said Pestsov; “it is a vicious circle. Woman is
deprived of rights from lack of education, and the lack of education
results from the absence of rights. We must not forget that the
subjection of women is so complete, and dates from such ages back that
we are often unwilling to recognize the gulf that separates them from
us,” said he.

“You said rights,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till Pestsov had
finished, “meaning the right of sitting on juries, of voting, of
presiding at official meetings, the right of entering the civil
service, of sitting in parliament....”

“Undoubtedly.”

“But if women, as a rare exception, can occupy such positions, it seems
to me you are wrong in using the expression ‘rights.’ It would be more
correct to say duties. Every man will agree that in doing the duty of a
juryman, a witness, a telegraph clerk, we feel we are performing
duties. And therefore it would be correct to say that women are seeking
duties, and quite legitimately. And one can but sympathize with this
desire to assist in the general labor of man.”

“Quite so,” Alexey Alexandrovitch assented. “The question, I imagine,
is simply whether they are fitted for such duties.”

“They will most likely be perfectly fitted,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
“when education has become general among them. We see this....”

“How about the proverb?” said the prince, who had a long while been
intent on the conversation, his little comical eyes twinkling. “I can
say it before my daughter: her hair is long, because her wit is....”

“Just what they thought of the negroes before their emancipation!” said
Pestsov angrily.

“What seems strange to me is that women should seek fresh duties,” said
Sergey Ivanovitch, “while we see, unhappily, that men usually try to
avoid them.”

“Duties are bound up with rights—power, money, honor; those are what
women are seeking,” said Pestsov.

“Just as though I should seek the right to be a wet-nurse and feel
injured because women are paid for the work, while no one will take
me,” said the old prince.

Turovtsin exploded in a loud roar of laughter and Sergey Ivanovitch
regretted that he had not made this comparison. Even Alexey
Alexandrovitch smiled.

“Yes, but a man can’t nurse a baby,” said Pestsov, “while a woman....”

“No, there was an Englishman who did suckle his baby on board ship,”
said the old prince, feeling this freedom in conversation permissible
before his own daughters.

“There are as many such Englishmen as there would be women officials,”
said Sergey Ivanovitch.

“Yes, but what is a girl to do who has no family?” put in Stepan
Arkadyevitch, thinking of Masha Tchibisova, whom he had had in his mind
all along, in sympathizing with Pestsov and supporting him.

“If the story of such a girl were thoroughly sifted, you would find she
had abandoned a family—her own or a sister’s, where she might have
found a woman’s duties,” Darya Alexandrovna broke in unexpectedly in a
tone of exasperation, probably suspecting what sort of girl Stepan
Arkadyevitch was thinking of.

“But we take our stand on principle as the ideal,” replied Pestsov in
his mellow bass. “Woman desires to have rights, to be independent,
educated. She is oppressed, humiliated by the consciousness of her
disabilities.”

“And I’m oppressed and humiliated that they won’t engage me at the
Foundling,” the old prince said again, to the huge delight of
Turovtsin, who in his mirth dropped his asparagus with the thick end in
the sauce.


Chapter 11

Everyone took part in the conversation except Kitty and Levin. At
first, when they were talking of the influence that one people has on
another, there rose to Levin’s mind what he had to say on the subject.
But these ideas, once of such importance in his eyes, seemed to come
into his brain as in a dream, and had now not the slightest interest
for him. It even struck him as strange that they should be so eager to
talk of what was of no use to anyone. Kitty, too, should, one would
have supposed, have been interested in what they were saying of the
rights and education of women. How often she had mused on the subject,
thinking of her friend abroad, Varenka, of her painful state of
dependence, how often she had wondered about herself what would become
of her if she did not marry, and how often she had argued with her
sister about it! But it did not interest her at all. She and Levin had
a conversation of their own, yet not a conversation, but some sort of
mysterious communication, which brought them every moment nearer, and
stirred in both a sense of glad terror before the unknown into which
they were entering.

At first Levin, in answer to Kitty’s question how he could have seen
her last year in the carriage, told her how he had been coming home
from the mowing along the highroad and had met her.

“It was very, very early in the morning. You were probably only just
awake. Your mother was asleep in the corner. It was an exquisite
morning. I was walking along wondering who it could be in a
four-in-hand? It was a splendid set of four horses with bells, and in a
second you flashed by, and I saw you at the window—you were sitting
like this, holding the strings of your cap in both hands, and thinking
awfully deeply about something,” he said, smiling. “How I should like
to know what you were thinking about then! Something important?”

“Wasn’t I dreadfully untidy?” she wondered, but seeing the smile of
ecstasy these reminiscences called up, she felt that the impression she
had made had been very good. She blushed and laughed with delight;
“Really I don’t remember.”

“How nicely Turovtsin laughs!” said Levin, admiring his moist eyes and
shaking chest.

“Have you known him long?” asked Kitty.

“Oh, everyone knows him!”

“And I see you think he’s a horrid man?”

“Not horrid, but nothing in him.”

“Oh, you’re wrong! And you must give up thinking so directly!” said
Kitty. “I used to have a very poor opinion of him too, but he, he’s an
awfully nice and wonderfully good-hearted man. He has a heart of gold.”

“How could you find out what sort of heart he has?”

“We are great friends. I know him very well. Last winter, soon after
... you came to see us,” she said, with a guilty and at the same time
confiding smile, “all Dolly’s children had scarlet fever, and he
happened to come and see her. And only fancy,” she said in a whisper,
“he felt so sorry for her that he stayed and began to help her look
after the children. Yes, and for three weeks he stopped with them, and
looked after the children like a nurse.”

“I am telling Konstantin Dmitrievitch about Turovtsin in the scarlet
fever,” she said, bending over to her sister.

“Yes, it was wonderful, noble!” said Dolly, glancing towards Turovtsin,
who had become aware they were talking of him, and smiling gently to
him. Levin glanced once more at Turovtsin, and wondered how it was he
had not realized all this man’s goodness before.

“I’m sorry, I’m sorry, and I’ll never think ill of people again!” he
said gaily, genuinely expressing what he felt at the moment.


Chapter 12

Connected with the conversation that had sprung up on the rights of
women there were certain questions as to the inequality of rights in
marriage improper to discuss before the ladies. Pestsov had several
times during dinner touched upon these questions, but Sergey Ivanovitch
and Stepan Arkadyevitch carefully drew him off them.

When they rose from the table and the ladies had gone out, Pestsov did
not follow them, but addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch, began to expound
the chief ground of inequality. The inequality in marriage, in his
opinion, lay in the fact that the infidelity of the wife and the
infidelity of the husband are punished unequally, both by the law and
by public opinion. Stepan Arkadyevitch went hurriedly up to Alexey
Alexandrovitch and offered him a cigar.

“No, I don’t smoke,” Alexey Alexandrovitch answered calmly, and as
though purposely wishing to show that he was not afraid of the subject,
he turned to Pestsov with a chilly smile.

“I imagine that such a view has a foundation in the very nature of
things,” he said, and would have gone on to the drawing-room. But at
this point Turovtsin broke suddenly and unexpectedly into the
conversation, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch.

“You heard, perhaps, about Pryatchnikov?” said Turovtsin, warmed up by
the champagne he had drunk, and long waiting for an opportunity to
break the silence that had weighed on him. “Vasya Pryatchnikov,” he
said, with a good-natured smile on his damp, red lips, addressing
himself principally to the most important guest, Alexey Alexandrovitch,
“they told me today he fought a duel with Kvitsky at Tver, and has
killed him.”

Just as it always seems that one bruises oneself on a sore place, so
Stepan Arkadyevitch felt now that the conversation would by ill luck
fall every moment on Alexey Alexandrovitch’s sore spot. He would again
have got his brother-in-law away, but Alexey Alexandrovitch himself
inquired, with curiosity:

“What did Pryatchnikov fight about?”

“His wife. Acted like a man, he did! Called him out and shot him!”

“Ah!” said Alexey Alexandrovitch indifferently, and lifting his
eyebrows, he went into the drawing-room.

“How glad I am you have come,” Dolly said with a frightened smile,
meeting him in the outer drawing-room. “I must talk to you. Let’s sit
here.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch, with the same expression of indifference, given
him by his lifted eyebrows, sat down beside Darya Alexandrovna, and
smiled affectedly.

“It’s fortunate,” said he, “especially as I was meaning to ask you to
excuse me, and to be taking leave. I have to start tomorrow.”

Darya Alexandrovna was firmly convinced of Anna’s innocence, and she
felt herself growing pale and her lips quivering with anger at this
frigid, unfeeling man, who was so calmly intending to ruin her innocent
friend.

“Alexey Alexandrovitch,” she said, with desperate resolution looking
him in the face, “I asked you about Anna, you made me no answer. How is
she?”

“She is, I believe, quite well, Darya Alexandrovna,” replied Alexey
Alexandrovitch, not looking at her.

“Alexey Alexandrovitch, forgive me, I have no right ... but I love Anna
as a sister, and esteem her; I beg, I beseech you to tell me what is
wrong between you? what fault do you find with her?”

Alexey Alexandrovitch frowned, and almost closing his eyes, dropped his
head.

“I presume that your husband has told you the grounds on which I
consider it necessary to change my attitude to Anna Arkadyevna?” he
said, not looking her in the face, but eyeing with displeasure
Shtcherbatsky, who was walking across the drawing-room.

“I don’t believe it, I don’t believe it, I can’t believe it!” Dolly
said, clasping her bony hands before her with a vigorous gesture. She
rose quickly, and laid her hand on Alexey Alexandrovitch’s sleeve. “We
shall be disturbed here. Come this way, please.”

Dolly’s agitation had an effect on Alexey Alexandrovitch. He got up and
submissively followed her to the schoolroom. They sat down to a table
covered with an oilcloth cut in slits by penknives.

“I don’t, I don’t believe it!” Dolly said, trying to catch his glance
that avoided her.

“One cannot disbelieve facts, Darya Alexandrovna,” said he, with an
emphasis on the word “facts.”

“But what has she done?” said Darya Alexandrovna. “What precisely has
she done?”

“She has forsaken her duty, and deceived her husband. That’s what she
has done,” said he.

“No, no, it can’t be! No, for God’s sake, you are mistaken,” said
Dolly, putting her hands to her temples and closing her eyes.

Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled coldly, with his lips alone, meaning to
signify to her and to himself the firmness of his conviction; but this
warm defense, though it could not shake him, reopened his wound. He
began to speak with greater heat.

“It is extremely difficult to be mistaken when a wife herself informs
her husband of the fact—informs him that eight years of her life, and a
son, all that’s a mistake, and that she wants to begin life again,” he
said angrily, with a snort.

“Anna and sin—I cannot connect them, I cannot believe it!”

“Darya Alexandrovna,” he said, now looking straight into Dolly’s
kindly, troubled face, and feeling that his tongue was being loosened
in spite of himself, “I would give a great deal for doubt to be still
possible. When I doubted, I was miserable, but it was better than now.
When I doubted, I had hope; but now there is no hope, and still I doubt
of everything. I am in such doubt of everything that I even hate my
son, and sometimes do not believe he is my son. I am very unhappy.”

He had no need to say that. Darya Alexandrovna had seen that as soon as
he glanced into her face; and she felt sorry for him, and her faith in
the innocence of her friend began to totter.

“Oh, this is awful, awful! But can it be true that you are resolved on
a divorce?”

“I am resolved on extreme measures. There is nothing else for me to
do.”

“Nothing else to do, nothing else to do....” she replied, with tears in
her eyes. “Oh no, don’t say nothing else to do!” she said.

“What is horrible in a trouble of this kind is that one cannot, as in
any other—in loss, in death—bear one’s trouble in peace, but that one
must act,” said he, as though guessing her thought. “One must get out
of the humiliating position in which one is placed; one can’t live _à
trois_.”

“I understand, I quite understand that,” said Dolly, and her head sank.
She was silent for a little, thinking of herself, of her own grief in
her family, and all at once, with an impulsive movement, she raised her
head and clasped her hands with an imploring gesture. “But wait a
little! You are a Christian. Think of her! What will become of her, if
you cast her off?”

“I have thought, Darya Alexandrovna, I have thought a great deal,” said
Alexey Alexandrovitch. His face turned red in patches, and his dim eyes
looked straight before him. Darya Alexandrovna at that moment pitied
him with all her heart. “That was what I did indeed when she herself
made known to me my humiliation; I left everything as of old. I gave
her a chance to reform, I tried to save her. And with what result? She
would not regard the slightest request—that she should observe
decorum,” he said, getting heated. “One may save anyone who does not
want to be ruined; but if the whole nature is so corrupt, so depraved,
that ruin itself seems to be her salvation, what’s to be done?”

“Anything, only not divorce!” answered Darya Alexandrovna

“But what is anything?”

“No, it is awful! She will be no one’s wife, she will be lost!”

“What can I do?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, raising his shoulders and
his eyebrows. The recollection of his wife’s last act had so incensed
him that he had become frigid, as at the beginning of the conversation.
“I am very grateful for your sympathy, but I must be going,” he said,
getting up.

“No, wait a minute. You must not ruin her. Wait a little; I will tell
you about myself. I was married, and my husband deceived me; in anger
and jealousy, I would have thrown up everything, I would myself.... But
I came to myself again; and who did it? Anna saved me. And here I am
living on. The children are growing up, my husband has come back to his
family, and feels his fault, is growing purer, better, and I live
on.... I have forgiven it, and you ought to forgive!”

Alexey Alexandrovitch heard her, but her words had no effect on him
now. All the hatred of that day when he had resolved on a divorce had
sprung up again in his soul. He shook himself, and said in a shrill,
loud voice:

“Forgive I cannot, and do not wish to, and I regard it as wrong. I have
done everything for this woman, and she has trodden it all in the mud
to which she is akin. I am not a spiteful man, I have never hated
anyone, but I hate her with my whole soul, and I cannot even forgive
her, because I hate her too much for all the wrong she has done me!” he
said, with tones of hatred in his voice.

“Love those that hate you....” Darya Alexandrovna whispered timorously.

Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled contemptuously. That he knew long ago, but
it could not be applied to his case.

“Love those that hate you, but to love those one hates is impossible.
Forgive me for having troubled you. Everyone has enough to bear in his
own grief!” And regaining his self-possession, Alexey Alexandrovitch
quietly took leave and went away.


Chapter 13

When they rose from table, Levin would have liked to follow Kitty into
the drawing-room; but he was afraid she might dislike this, as too
obviously paying her attention. He remained in the little ring of men,
taking part in the general conversation, and without looking at Kitty,
he was aware of her movements, her looks, and the place where she was
in the drawing-room.

He did at once, and without the smallest effort, keep the promise he
had made her—always to think well of all men, and to like everyone
always. The conversation fell on the village commune, in which Pestsov
saw a sort of special principle, called by him the “choral” principle.
Levin did not agree with Pestsov, nor with his brother, who had a
special attitude of his own, both admitting and not admitting the
significance of the Russian commune. But he talked to them, simply
trying to reconcile and soften their differences. He was not in the
least interested in what he said himself, and even less so in what they
said; all he wanted was that they and everyone should be happy and
contented. He knew now the one thing of importance; and that one thing
was at first there, in the drawing-room, and then began moving across
and came to a standstill at the door. Without turning round he felt the
eyes fixed on him, and the smile, and he could not help turning round.
She was standing in the doorway with Shtcherbatsky, looking at him.

“I thought you were going towards the piano,” said he, going up to her.
“That’s something I miss in the country—music.”

“No; we only came to fetch you and thank you,” she said, rewarding him
with a smile that was like a gift, “for coming. What do they want to
argue for? No one ever convinces anyone, you know.”

“Yes; that’s true,” said Levin; “it generally happens that one argues
warmly simply because one can’t make out what one’s opponent wants to
prove.”

Levin had often noticed in discussions between the most intelligent
people that after enormous efforts, and an enormous expenditure of
logical subtleties and words, the disputants finally arrived at being
aware that what they had so long been struggling to prove to one
another had long ago, from the beginning of the argument, been known to
both, but that they liked different things, and would not define what
they liked for fear of its being attacked. He had often had the
experience of suddenly in a discussion grasping what it was his
opponent liked and at once liking it too, and immediately he found
himself agreeing, and then all arguments fell away as useless.
Sometimes, too, he had experienced the opposite, expressing at last
what he liked himself, which he was devising arguments to defend, and,
chancing to express it well and genuinely, he had found his opponent at
once agreeing and ceasing to dispute his position. He tried to say
this.

She knitted her brow, trying to understand. But directly he began to
illustrate his meaning, she understood at once.

“I know: one must find out what he is arguing for, what is precious to
him, then one can....”

She had completely guessed and expressed his badly expressed idea.
Levin smiled joyfully; he was struck by this transition from the
confused, verbose discussion with Pestsov and his brother to this
laconic, clear, almost wordless communication of the most complex
ideas.

Shtcherbatsky moved away from them, and Kitty, going up to a
card-table, sat down, and, taking up the chalk, began drawing diverging
circles over the new green cloth.

They began again on the subject that had been started at dinner—the
liberty and occupations of women. Levin was of the opinion of Darya
Alexandrovna that a girl who did not marry should find a woman’s duties
in a family. He supported this view by the fact that no family can get
on without women to help; that in every family, poor or rich, there are
and must be nurses, either relations or hired.

“No,” said Kitty, blushing, but looking at him all the more boldly with
her truthful eyes; “a girl may be so circumstanced that she cannot live
in the family without humiliation, while she herself....”

At the hint he understood her.

“Oh, yes,” he said. “Yes, yes, yes—you’re right; you’re right!”

And he saw all that Pestsov had been maintaining at dinner of the
liberty of woman, simply from getting a glimpse of the terror of an old
maid’s existence and its humiliation in Kitty’s heart; and loving her,
he felt that terror and humiliation, and at once gave up his arguments.

A silence followed. She was still drawing with the chalk on the table.
Her eyes were shining with a soft light. Under the influence of her
mood he felt in all his being a continually growing tension of
happiness.

“Ah! I’ve scribbled all over the table!” she said, and, laying down the
chalk, she made a movement as though to get up.

“What! shall I be left alone—without her?” he thought with horror, and
he took the chalk. “Wait a minute,” he said, sitting down to the table.
“I’ve long wanted to ask you one thing.”

He looked straight into her caressing, though frightened eyes.

“Please, ask it.”

“Here,” he said; and he wrote the initial letters, _w, y, t, m, i, c,
n, b, d, t, m, n, o, t_. These letters meant, “When you told me it
could never be, did that mean never, or then?” There seemed no
likelihood that she could make out this complicated sentence; but he
looked at her as though his life depended on her understanding the
words. She glanced at him seriously, then leaned her puckered brow on
her hands and began to read. Once or twice she stole a look at him, as
though asking him, “Is it what I think?”

“I understand,” she said, flushing a little.

“What is this word?” he said, pointing to the _n_ that stood for
_never_.

“It means _never_,” she said; “but that’s not true!”

He quickly rubbed out what he had written, gave her the chalk, and
stood up. She wrote, _t, i, c, n, a, d_.

Dolly was completely comforted in the depression caused by her
conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch when she caught sight of the
two figures: Kitty with the chalk in her hand, with a shy and happy
smile looking upwards at Levin, and his handsome figure bending over
the table with glowing eyes fastened one minute on the table and the
next on her. He was suddenly radiant: he had understood. It meant,
“Then I could not answer differently.”

He glanced at her questioningly, timidly.

“Only then?”

“Yes,” her smile answered.

“And n... and now?” he asked.

“Well, read this. I’ll tell you what I should like—should like so
much!” she wrote the initial letters, _i, y, c, f, a, f, w, h._ This
meant, “If you could forget and forgive what happened.”

He snatched the chalk with nervous, trembling fingers, and breaking it,
wrote the initial letters of the following phrase, “I have nothing to
forget and to forgive; I have never ceased to love you.”

She glanced at him with a smile that did not waver.

“I understand,” she said in a whisper.

He sat down and wrote a long phrase. She understood it all, and without
asking him, “Is it this?” took the chalk and at once answered.

For a long while he could not understand what she had written, and
often looked into her eyes. He was stupefied with happiness. He could
not supply the word she had meant; but in her charming eyes, beaming
with happiness, he saw all he needed to know. And he wrote three
letters. But he had hardly finished writing when she read them over her
arm, and herself finished and wrote the answer, “Yes.”

“You’re playing _secrétaire_?” said the old prince. “But we must really
be getting along if you want to be in time at the theater.”

Levin got up and escorted Kitty to the door.

In their conversation everything had been said; it had been said that
she loved him, and that she would tell her father and mother that he
would come tomorrow morning.


Chapter 14

When Kitty had gone and Levin was left alone, he felt such uneasiness
without her, and such an impatient longing to get as quickly, as
quickly as possible, to tomorrow morning, when he would see her again
and be plighted to her forever, that he felt afraid, as though of
death, of those fourteen hours that he had to get through without her.
It was essential for him to be with someone to talk to, so as not to be
left alone, to kill time. Stepan Arkadyevitch would have been the
companion most congenial to him, but he was going out, he said, to a
_soirée_, in reality to the ballet. Levin only had time to tell him he
was happy, and that he loved him, and would never, never forget what he
had done for him. The eyes and the smile of Stepan Arkadyevitch showed
Levin that he comprehended that feeling fittingly.

“Oh, so it’s not time to die yet?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pressing
Levin’s hand with emotion.

“N-n-no!” said Levin.

Darya Alexandrovna too, as she said good-bye to him, gave him a sort of
congratulation, saying, “How glad I am you have met Kitty again! One
must value old friends.” Levin did not like these words of Darya
Alexandrovna’s. She could not understand how lofty and beyond her it
all was, and she ought not to have dared to allude to it. Levin said
good-bye to them, but, not to be left alone, he attached himself to his
brother.

“Where are you going?”

“I’m going to a meeting.”

“Well, I’ll come with you. May I?”

“What for? Yes, come along,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling. “What is
the matter with you today?”

“With me? Happiness is the matter with me!” said Levin, letting down
the window of the carriage they were driving in. “You don’t mind?—it’s
so stifling. It’s happiness is the matter with me! Why is it you have
never married?”

Sergey Ivanovitch smiled.

“I am very glad, she seems a nice gi....” Sergey Ivanovitch was
beginning.

“Don’t say it! don’t say it!” shouted Levin, clutching at the collar of
his fur coat with both hands, and muffling him up in it. “She’s a nice
girl” were such simple, humble words, so out of harmony with his
feeling.

Sergey Ivanovitch laughed outright a merry laugh, which was rare with
him. “Well, anyway, I may say that I’m very glad of it.”

“That you may do tomorrow, tomorrow and nothing more! Nothing, nothing,
silence,” said Levin, and muffling him once more in his fur coat, he
added: “I do like you so! Well, is it possible for me to be present at
the meeting?”

“Of course it is.”

“What is your discussion about today?” asked Levin, never ceasing
smiling.

They arrived at the meeting. Levin heard the secretary hesitatingly
read the minutes which he obviously did not himself understand; but
Levin saw from this secretary’s face what a good, nice, kind-hearted
person he was. This was evident from his confusion and embarrassment in
reading the minutes. Then the discussion began. They were disputing
about the misappropriation of certain sums and the laying of certain
pipes, and Sergey Ivanovitch was very cutting to two members, and said
something at great length with an air of triumph; and another member,
scribbling something on a bit of paper, began timidly at first, but
afterwards answered him very viciously and delightfully. And then
Sviazhsky (he was there too) said something too, very handsomely and
nobly. Levin listened to them, and saw clearly that these missing sums
and these pipes were not anything real, and that they were not at all
angry, but were all the nicest, kindest people, and everything was as
happy and charming as possible among them. They did no harm to anyone,
and were all enjoying it. What struck Levin was that he could see
through them all today, and from little, almost imperceptible signs
knew the soul of each, and saw distinctly that they were all good at
heart. And Levin himself in particular they were all extremely fond of
that day. That was evident from the way they spoke to him, from the
friendly, affectionate way even those he did not know looked at him.

“Well, did you like it?” Sergey Ivanovitch asked him.

“Very much. I never supposed it was so interesting! Capital! Splendid!”

Sviazhsky went up to Levin and invited him to come round to tea with
him. Levin was utterly at a loss to comprehend or recall what it was he
had disliked in Sviazhsky, what he had failed to find in him. He was a
clever and wonderfully good-hearted man.

“Most delighted,” he said, and asked after his wife and sister-in-law.
And from a queer association of ideas, because in his imagination the
idea of Sviazhsky’s sister-in-law was connected with marriage, it
occurred to him that there was no one to whom he could more suitably
speak of his happiness, and he was very glad to go and see them.

Sviazhsky questioned him about his improvements on his estate,
presupposing, as he always did, that there was no possibility of doing
anything not done already in Europe, and now this did not in the least
annoy Levin. On the contrary, he felt that Sviazhsky was right, that
the whole business was of little value, and he saw the wonderful
softness and consideration with which Sviazhsky avoided fully
expressing his correct view. The ladies of the Sviazhsky household were
particularly delightful. It seemed to Levin that they knew all about it
already and sympathized with him, saying nothing merely from delicacy.
He stayed with them one hour, two, three, talking of all sorts of
subjects but the one thing that filled his heart, and did not observe
that he was boring them dreadfully, and that it was long past their
bedtime.

Sviazhsky went with him into the hall, yawning and wondering at the
strange humor his friend was in. It was past one o’clock. Levin went
back to his hotel, and was dismayed at the thought that all alone now
with his impatience he had ten hours still left to get through. The
servant, whose turn it was to be up all night, lighted his candles, and
would have gone away, but Levin stopped him. This servant, Yegor, whom
Levin had noticed before, struck him as a very intelligent, excellent,
and, above all, good-hearted man.

“Well, Yegor, it’s hard work not sleeping, isn’t it?”

“One’s got to put up with it! It’s part of our work, you see. In a
gentleman’s house it’s easier; but then here one makes more.”

It appeared that Yegor had a family, three boys and a daughter, a
sempstress, whom he wanted to marry to a cashier in a saddler’s shop.

Levin, on hearing this, informed Yegor that, in his opinion, in
marriage the great thing was love, and that with love one would always
be happy, for happiness rests only on oneself.

Yegor listened attentively, and obviously quite took in Levin’s idea,
but by way of assent to it he enunciated, greatly to Levin’s surprise,
the observation that when he had lived with good masters he had always
been satisfied with his masters, and now was perfectly satisfied with
his employer, though he was a Frenchman.

“Wonderfully good-hearted fellow!” thought Levin.

“Well, but you yourself, Yegor, when you got married, did you love your
wife?”

“Ay! and why not?” responded Yegor.

And Levin saw that Yegor too was in an excited state and intending to
express all his most heartfelt emotions.

“My life, too, has been a wonderful one. From a child up....” he was
beginning with flashing eyes, apparently catching Levin’s enthusiasm,
just as people catch yawning.

But at that moment a ring was heard. Yegor departed, and Levin was left
alone. He had eaten scarcely anything at dinner, had refused tea and
supper at Sviazhsky’s, but he was incapable of thinking of supper. He
had not slept the previous night, but was incapable of thinking of
sleep either. His room was cold, but he was oppressed by heat. He
opened both the movable panes in his window and sat down to the table
opposite the open panes. Over the snow-covered roofs could be seen a
decorated cross with chains, and above it the rising triangle of
Charles’s Wain with the yellowish light of Capella. He gazed at the
cross, then at the stars, drank in the fresh freezing air that flowed
evenly into the room, and followed as though in a dream the images and
memories that rose in his imagination. At four o’clock he heard steps
in the passage and peeped out at the door. It was the gambler Myaskin,
whom he knew, coming from the club. He walked gloomily, frowning and
coughing. “Poor, unlucky fellow!” thought Levin, and tears came into
his eyes from love and pity for this man. He would have talked with
him, and tried to comfort him, but remembering that he had nothing but
his shirt on, he changed his mind and sat down again at the open pane
to bathe in the cold air and gaze at the exquisite lines of the cross,
silent, but full of meaning for him, and the mounting lurid yellow
star. At seven o’clock there was a noise of people polishing the
floors, and bells ringing in some servants’ department, and Levin felt
that he was beginning to get frozen. He closed the pane, washed,
dressed, and went out into the street.


Chapter 15

The streets were still empty. Levin went to the house of the
Shtcherbatskys. The visitors’ doors were closed and everything was
asleep. He walked back, went into his room again, and asked for coffee.
The day servant, not Yegor this time, brought it to him. Levin would
have entered into conversation with him, but a bell rang for the
servant, and he went out. Levin tried to drink coffee and put some roll
in his mouth, but his mouth was quite at a loss what to do with the
roll. Levin, rejecting the roll, put on his coat and went out again for
a walk. It was nine o’clock when he reached the Shtcherbatskys’ steps
the second time. In the house they were only just up, and the cook came
out to go marketing. He had to get through at least two hours more.

All that night and morning Levin lived perfectly unconsciously, and
felt perfectly lifted out of the conditions of material life. He had
eaten nothing for a whole day, he had not slept for two nights, had
spent several hours undressed in the frozen air, and felt not simply
fresher and stronger than ever, but felt utterly independent of his
body; he moved without muscular effort, and felt as if he could do
anything. He was convinced he could fly upwards or lift the corner of
the house, if need be. He spent the remainder of the time in the
street, incessantly looking at his watch and gazing about him.

And what he saw then, he never saw again after. The children especially
going to school, the bluish doves flying down from the roofs to the
pavement, and the little loaves covered with flour, thrust out by an
unseen hand, touched him. Those loaves, those doves, and those two boys
were not earthly creatures. It all happened at the same time: a boy ran
towards a dove and glanced smiling at Levin; the dove, with a whir of
her wings, darted away, flashing in the sun, amid grains of snow that
quivered in the air, while from a little window there came a smell of
fresh-baked bread, and the loaves were put out. All of this together
was so extraordinarily nice that Levin laughed and cried with delight.
Going a long way round by Gazetny Place and Kislovka, he went back
again to the hotel, and putting his watch before him, he sat down to
wait for twelve o’clock. In the next room they were talking about some
sort of machines, and swindling, and coughing their morning coughs.
They did not realize that the hand was near twelve. The hand reached
it. Levin went out onto the steps. The sledge-drivers clearly knew all
about it. They crowded round Levin with happy faces, quarreling among
themselves, and offering their services. Trying not to offend the other
sledge drivers, and promising to drive with them too, Levin took one
and told him to drive to the Shtcherbatskys’. The sledge-driver was
splendid in a white shirt-collar sticking out over his overcoat and
into his strong, full-blooded red neck. The sledge was high and
comfortable, and altogether such a one as Levin never drove in after,
and the horse was a good one, and tried to gallop but didn’t seem to
move. The driver knew the Shtcherbatskys’ house, and drew up at the
entrance with a curve of his arm and a “Wo!” especially indicative of
respect for his fare. The Shtcherbatskys’ hall-porter certainly knew
all about it. This was evident from the smile in his eyes and the way
he said:

“Well, it’s a long while since you’ve been to see us, Konstantin
Dmitrievitch!”

Not only he knew all about it, but he was unmistakably delighted and
making efforts to conceal his joy. Looking into his kindly old eyes,
Levin realized even something new in his happiness.

“Are they up?”

“Pray walk in! Leave it here,” said he, smiling, as Levin would have
come back to take his hat. That meant something.

“To whom shall I announce your honor?” asked the footman.

The footman, though a young man, and one of the new school of footmen,
a dandy, was a very kind-hearted, good fellow, and he too knew all
about it.

“The princess ... the prince ... the young princess....” said Levin.

The first person he saw was Mademoiselle Linon. She walked across the
room, and her ringlets and her face were beaming. He had only just
spoken to her, when suddenly he heard the rustle of a skirt at the
door, and Mademoiselle Linon vanished from Levin’s eyes, and a joyful
terror came over him at the nearness of his happiness. Mademoiselle
Linon was in great haste, and leaving him, went out at the other door.
Directly she had gone out, swift, swift light steps sounded on the
parquet, and his bliss, his life, himself—what was best in himself,
what he had so long sought and longed for—was quickly, so quickly
approaching him. She did not walk, but seemed, by some unseen force, to
float to him. He saw nothing but her clear, truthful eyes, frightened
by the same bliss of love that flooded his heart. Those eyes were
shining nearer and nearer, blinding him with their light of love. She
stopped still close to him, touching him. Her hands rose and dropped
onto his shoulders.

She had done all she could—she had run up to him and given herself up
entirely, shy and happy. He put his arms round her and pressed his lips
to her mouth that sought his kiss.

She too had not slept all night, and had been expecting him all the
morning.

Her mother and father had consented without demur, and were happy in
her happiness. She had been waiting for him. She wanted to be the first
to tell him her happiness and his. She had got ready to see him alone,
and had been delighted at the idea, and had been shy and ashamed, and
did not know herself what she was doing. She had heard his steps and
voice, and had waited at the door for Mademoiselle Linon to go.
Mademoiselle Linon had gone away. Without thinking, without asking
herself how and what, she had gone up to him, and did as she was doing.

“Let us go to mamma!” she said, taking him by the hand. For a long
while he could say nothing, not so much because he was afraid of
desecrating the loftiness of his emotion by a word, as that every time
he tried to say something, instead of words he felt that tears of
happiness were welling up. He took her hand and kissed it.

“Can it be true?” he said at last in a choked voice. “I can’t believe
you love me, dear!”

She smiled at that “dear,” and at the timidity with which he glanced at
her.

“Yes!” she said significantly, deliberately. “I am so happy!”

Not letting go his hands, she went into the drawing-room. The princess,
seeing them, breathed quickly, and immediately began to cry and then
immediately began to laugh, and with a vigorous step Levin had not
expected, ran up to him, and hugging his head, kissed him, wetting his
cheeks with her tears.

“So it is all settled! I am glad. Love her. I am glad.... Kitty!”

“You’ve not been long settling things,” said the old prince, trying to
seem unmoved; but Levin noticed that his eyes were wet when he turned
to him.

“I’ve long, always wished for this!” said the prince, taking Levin by
the arm and drawing him towards himself. “Even when this little
feather-head fancied....”

“Papa!” shrieked Kitty, and shut his mouth with her hands.

“Well, I won’t!” he said. “I’m very, very ... plea... Oh, what a fool I
am....”

He embraced Kitty, kissed her face, her hand, her face again, and made
the sign of the cross over her.

And there came over Levin a new feeling of love for this man, till then
so little known to him, when he saw how slowly and tenderly Kitty
kissed his muscular hand.


Chapter 16

The princess sat in her armchair, silent and smiling; the prince sat
down beside her. Kitty stood by her father’s chair, still holding his
hand. All were silent.

The princess was the first to put everything into words, and to
translate all thoughts and feelings into practical questions. And all
equally felt this strange and painful for the first minute.

“When is it to be? We must have the benediction and announcement. And
when’s the wedding to be? What do you think, Alexander?”

“Here he is,” said the old prince, pointing to Levin—“he’s the
principal person in the matter.”

“When?” said Levin blushing. “Tomorrow. If you ask me, I should say,
the benediction today and the wedding tomorrow.”

“Come, _mon cher_, that’s nonsense!”

“Well, in a week.”

“He’s quite mad.”

“No, why so?”

“Well, upon my word!” said the mother, smiling, delighted at this
haste. “How about the trousseau?”

“Will there really be a trousseau and all that?” Levin thought with
horror. “But can the trousseau and the benediction and all that—can it
spoil my happiness? Nothing can spoil it!” He glanced at Kitty, and
noticed that she was not in the least, not in the very least, disturbed
by the idea of the trousseau. “Then it must be all right,” he thought.

“Oh, I know nothing about it; I only said what I should like,” he said
apologetically.

“We’ll talk it over, then. The benediction and announcement can take
place now. That’s very well.”

The princess went up to her husband, kissed him, and would have gone
away, but he kept her, embraced her, and, tenderly as a young lover,
kissed her several times, smiling. The old people were obviously
muddled for a moment, and did not quite know whether it was they who
were in love again or their daughter. When the prince and the princess
had gone, Levin went up to his betrothed and took her hand. He was
self-possessed now and could speak, and he had a great deal he wanted
to tell her. But he said not at all what he had to say.

“How I knew it would be so! I never hoped for it; and yet in my heart I
was always sure,” he said. “I believe that it was ordained.”

“And I!” she said. “Even when....” She stopped and went on again,
looking at him resolutely with her truthful eyes, “Even when I thrust
from me my happiness. I always loved you alone, but I was carried away.
I ought to tell you.... Can you forgive that?”

“Perhaps it was for the best. You will have to forgive me so much. I
ought to tell you....”

This was one of the things he had meant to speak about. He had resolved
from the first to tell her two things—that he was not chaste as she
was, and that he was not a believer. It was agonizing, but he
considered he ought to tell her both these facts.

“No, not now, later!” he said.

“Very well, later, but you must certainly tell me. I’m not afraid of
anything. I want to know everything. Now it is settled.”

He added: “Settled that you’ll take me whatever I may be—you won’t give
me up? Yes?”

“Yes, yes.”

Their conversation was interrupted by Mademoiselle Linon, who with an
affected but tender smile came to congratulate her favorite pupil.
Before she had gone, the servants came in with their congratulations.
Then relations arrived, and there began that state of blissful
absurdity from which Levin did not emerge till the day after his
wedding. Levin was in a continual state of awkwardness and discomfort,
but the intensity of his happiness went on all the while increasing. He
felt continually that a great deal was being expected of him—what, he
did not know; and he did everything he was told, and it all gave him
happiness. He had thought his engagement would have nothing about it
like others, that the ordinary conditions of engaged couples would
spoil his special happiness; but it ended in his doing exactly as other
people did, and his happiness being only increased thereby and becoming
more and more special, more and more unlike anything that had ever
happened.

“Now we shall have sweetmeats to eat,” said Mademoiselle Linon—and
Levin drove off to buy sweetmeats.

“Well, I’m very glad,” said Sviazhsky. “I advise you to get the
bouquets from Fomin’s.”

“Oh, are they wanted?” And he drove to Fomin’s.

His brother offered to lend him money, as he would have so many
expenses, presents to give....

“Oh, are presents wanted?” And he galloped to Foulde’s.

And at the confectioner’s, and at Fomin’s, and at Foulde’s he saw that
he was expected; that they were pleased to see him, and prided
themselves on his happiness, just as everyone whom he had to do with
during those days. What was extraordinary was that everyone not only
liked him, but even people previously unsympathetic, cold, and callous,
were enthusiastic over him, gave way to him in everything, treated his
feeling with tenderness and delicacy, and shared his conviction that he
was the happiest man in the world because his betrothed was beyond
perfection. Kitty too felt the same thing. When Countess Nordston
ventured to hint that she had hoped for something better, Kitty was so
angry and proved so conclusively that nothing in the world could be
better than Levin, that Countess Nordston had to admit it, and in
Kitty’s presence never met Levin without a smile of ecstatic
admiration.

The confession he had promised was the one painful incident of this
time. He consulted the old prince, and with his sanction gave Kitty his
diary, in which there was written the confession that tortured him. He
had written this diary at the time with a view to his future wife. Two
things caused him anguish: his lack of purity and his lack of faith.
His confession of unbelief passed unnoticed. She was religious, had
never doubted the truths of religion, but his external unbelief did not
affect her in the least. Through love she knew all his soul, and in his
soul she saw what she wanted, and that such a state of soul should be
called unbelieving was to her a matter of no account. The other
confession set her weeping bitterly.

Levin, not without an inner struggle, handed her his diary. He knew
that between him and her there could not be, and should not be,
secrets, and so he had decided that so it must be. But he had not
realized what an effect it would have on her, he had not put himself in
her place. It was only when the same evening he came to their house
before the theater, went into her room and saw her tear-stained,
pitiful, sweet face, miserable with suffering he had caused and nothing
could undo, he felt the abyss that separated his shameful past from her
dovelike purity, and was appalled at what he had done.

“Take them, take these dreadful books!” she said, pushing away the
notebooks lying before her on the table. “Why did you give them me? No,
it was better anyway,” she added, touched by his despairing face. “But
it’s awful, awful!”

His head sank, and he was silent. He could say nothing.

“You can’t forgive me,” he whispered.

“Yes, I forgive you; but it’s terrible!”

But his happiness was so immense that this confession did not shatter
it, it only added another shade to it. She forgave him; but from that
time more than ever he considered himself unworthy of her, morally
bowed down lower than ever before her, and prized more highly than ever
his undeserved happiness.


Chapter 17

Unconsciously going over in his memory the conversations that had taken
place during and after dinner, Alexey Alexandrovitch returned to his
solitary room. Darya Alexandrovna’s words about forgiveness had aroused
in him nothing but annoyance. The applicability or non-applicability of
the Christian precept to his own case was too difficult a question to
be discussed lightly, and this question had long ago been answered by
Alexey Alexandrovitch in the negative. Of all that had been said, what
stuck most in his memory was the phrase of stupid, good-natured
Turovtsin—“_Acted like a man, he did! Called him out and shot him!_”
Everyone had apparently shared this feeling, though from politeness
they had not expressed it.

“But the matter is settled, it’s useless thinking about it,” Alexey
Alexandrovitch told himself. And thinking of nothing but the journey
before him, and the revision work he had to do, he went into his room
and asked the porter who escorted him where his man was. The porter
said that the man had only just gone out. Alexey Alexandrovitch ordered
tea to be sent him, sat down to the table, and taking the guidebook,
began considering the route of his journey.

“Two telegrams,” said his manservant, coming into the room. “I beg your
pardon, your excellency; I’d only just that minute gone out.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch took the telegrams and opened them. The first
telegram was the announcement of Stremov’s appointment to the very post
Karenin had coveted. Alexey Alexandrovitch flung the telegram down, and
flushing a little, got up and began to pace up and down the room.
“_Quos vult perdere dementat_,” he said, meaning by _quos_ the persons
responsible for this appointment. He was not so much annoyed that he
had not received the post, that he had been conspicuously passed over;
but it was incomprehensible, amazing to him that they did not see that
the wordy phrase-monger Stremov was the last man fit for it. How could
they fail to see how they were ruining themselves, lowering their
_prestige_ by this appointment?

“Something else in the same line,” he said to himself bitterly, opening
the second telegram. The telegram was from his wife. Her name, written
in blue pencil, “Anna,” was the first thing that caught his eye. “I am
dying; I beg, I implore you to come. I shall die easier with your
forgiveness,” he read. He smiled contemptuously, and flung down the
telegram. That this was a trick and a fraud, of that, he thought for
the first minute, there could be no doubt.

“There is no deceit she would stick at. She was near her confinement.
Perhaps it is the confinement. But what can be their aim? To legitimize
the child, to compromise me, and prevent a divorce,” he thought. “But
something was said in it: I am dying....” He read the telegram again,
and suddenly the plain meaning of what was said in it struck him.

“And if it is true?” he said to himself. “If it is true that in the
moment of agony and nearness to death she is genuinely penitent, and I,
taking it for a trick, refuse to go? That would not only be cruel, and
everyone would blame me, but it would be stupid on my part.”

“Piotr, call a coach; I am going to Petersburg,” he said to his
servant.

Alexey Alexandrovitch decided that he would go to Petersburg and see
his wife. If her illness was a trick, he would say nothing and go away
again. If she was really in danger, and wished to see him before her
death, he would forgive her if he found her alive, and pay her the last
duties if he came too late.

All the way he thought no more of what he ought to do.

With a sense of weariness and uncleanness from the night spent in the
train, in the early fog of Petersburg Alexey Alexandrovitch drove
through the deserted Nevsky and stared straight before him, not
thinking of what was awaiting him. He could not think about it, because
in picturing what would happen, he could not drive away the reflection
that her death would at once remove all the difficulty of his position.
Bakers, closed shops, night-cabmen, porters sweeping the pavements
flashed past his eyes, and he watched it all, trying to smother the
thought of what was awaiting him, and what he dared not hope for, and
yet was hoping for. He drove up to the steps. A sledge and a carriage
with the coachman asleep stood at the entrance. As he went into the
entry, Alexey Alexandrovitch, as it were, got out his resolution from
the remotest corner of his brain, and mastered it thoroughly. Its
meaning ran: “If it’s a trick, then calm contempt and departure. If
truth, do what is proper.”

The porter opened the door before Alexey Alexandrovitch rang. The
porter, Kapitonitch, looked queer in an old coat, without a tie, and in
slippers.

“How is your mistress?”

“A successful confinement yesterday.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped short and turned white. He felt
distinctly now how intensely he had longed for her death.

“And how is she?”

Korney in his morning apron ran downstairs.

“Very ill,” he answered. “There was a consultation yesterday, and the
doctor’s here now.”

“Take my things,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, and feeling some relief
at the news that there was still hope of her death, he went into the
hall.

On the hatstand there was a military overcoat. Alexey Alexandrovitch
noticed it and asked:

“Who is here?”

“The doctor, the midwife, and Count Vronsky.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the inner rooms.

In the drawing-room there was no one; at the sound of his steps there
came out of her boudoir the midwife in a cap with lilac ribbons.

She went up to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and with the familiarity given by
the approach of death took him by the arm and drew him towards the
bedroom.

“Thank God you’ve come! She keeps on about you and nothing but you,”
she said.

“Make haste with the ice!” the doctor’s peremptory voice said from the
bedroom.

Alexey Alexandrovitch went into her boudoir.

At the table, sitting sideways in a low chair, was Vronsky, his face
hidden in his hands, weeping. He jumped up at the doctor’s voice, took
his hands from his face, and saw Alexey Alexandrovitch. Seeing the
husband, he was so overwhelmed that he sat down again, drawing his head
down to his shoulders, as if he wanted to disappear; but he made an
effort over himself, got up and said:

“She is dying. The doctors say there is no hope. I am entirely in your
power, only let me be here ... though I am at your disposal. I....”

Alexey Alexandrovitch, seeing Vronsky’s tears, felt a rush of that
nervous emotion always produced in him by the sight of other people’s
suffering, and turning away his face, he moved hurriedly to the door,
without hearing the rest of his words. From the bedroom came the sound
of Anna’s voice saying something. Her voice was lively, eager, with
exceedingly distinct intonations. Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the
bedroom, and went up to the bed. She was lying turned with her face
towards him. Her cheeks were flushed crimson, her eyes glittered, her
little white hands thrust out from the sleeves of her dressing gown
were playing with the quilt, twisting it about. It seemed as though she
were not only well and blooming, but in the happiest frame of mind. She
was talking rapidly, musically, and with exceptionally correct
articulation and expressive intonation.

“For Alexey—I am speaking of Alexey Alexandrovitch (what a strange and
awful thing that both are Alexey, isn’t it?)—Alexey would not refuse
me. I should forget, he would forgive.... But why doesn’t he come? He’s
so good he doesn’t know himself how good he is. Ah, my God, what agony!
Give me some water, quick! Oh, that will be bad for her, my little
girl! Oh, very well then, give her to a nurse. Yes, I agree, it’s
better in fact. He’ll be coming; it will hurt him to see her. Give her
to the nurse.”

“Anna Arkadyevna, he has come. Here he is!” said the midwife, trying to
attract her attention to Alexey Alexandrovitch.

“Oh, what nonsense!” Anna went on, not seeing her husband. “No, give
her to me; give me my little one! He has not come yet. You say he won’t
forgive me, because you don’t know him. No one knows him. I’m the only
one, and it was hard for me even. His eyes I ought to know—Seryozha has
just the same eyes—and I can’t bear to see them because of it. Has
Seryozha had his dinner? I know everyone will forget him. He would not
forget. Seryozha must be moved into the corner room, and Mariette must
be asked to sleep with him.”

All of a sudden she shrank back, was silent; and in terror, as though
expecting a blow, as though to defend herself, she raised her hands to
her face. She had seen her husband.

“No, no!” she began. “I am not afraid of him; I am afraid of death.
Alexey, come here. I am in a hurry, because I’ve no time, I’ve not long
left to live; the fever will begin directly and I shall understand
nothing more. Now I understand, I understand it all, I see it all!”

Alexey Alexandrovitch’s wrinkled face wore an expression of agony; he
took her by the hand and tried to say something, but he could not utter
it; his lower lip quivered, but he still went on struggling with his
emotion, and only now and then glanced at her. And each time he glanced
at her, he saw her eyes gazing at him with such passionate and
triumphant tenderness as he had never seen in them.

“Wait a minute, you don’t know ... stay a little, stay!...” She
stopped, as though collecting her ideas. “Yes,” she began; “yes, yes,
yes. This is what I wanted to say. Don’t be surprised at me. I’m still
the same.... But there is another woman in me, I’m afraid of her: she
loved that man, and I tried to hate you, and could not forget about her
that used to be. I’m not that woman. Now I’m my real self, all myself.
I’m dying now, I know I shall die, ask him. Even now I feel—see here,
the weights on my feet, on my hands, on my fingers. My fingers—see how
huge they are! But this will soon all be over.... Only one thing I
want: forgive me, forgive me quite. I’m terrible, but my nurse used to
tell me; the holy martyr—what was her name? She was worse. And I’ll go
to Rome; there’s a wilderness, and there I shall be no trouble to
anyone, only I’ll take Seryozha and the little one.... No, you can’t
forgive me! I know, it can’t be forgiven! No, no, go away, you’re too
good!” She held his hand in one burning hand, while she pushed him away
with the other.

The nervous agitation of Alexey Alexandrovitch kept increasing, and had
by now reached such a point that he ceased to struggle with it. He
suddenly felt that what he had regarded as nervous agitation was on the
contrary a blissful spiritual condition that gave him all at once a new
happiness he had never known. He did not think that the Christian law
that he had been all his life trying to follow, enjoined on him to
forgive and love his enemies; but a glad feeling of love and
forgiveness for his enemies filled his heart. He knelt down, and laying
his head in the curve of her arm, which burned him as with fire through
the sleeve, he sobbed like a little child. She put her arm around his
head, moved towards him, and with defiant pride lifted up her eyes.

“That is he. I knew him! Now, forgive me, everyone, forgive me!...
They’ve come again; why don’t they go away?... Oh, take these cloaks
off me!”

The doctor unloosed her hands, carefully laying her on the pillow, and
covered her up to the shoulders. She lay back submissively, and looked
before her with beaming eyes.

“Remember one thing, that I needed nothing but forgiveness, and I want
nothing more.... Why doesn’t _he_ come?” she said, turning to the door
towards Vronsky. “Do come, do come! Give him your hand.”

Vronsky came to the side of the bed, and seeing Anna, again hid his
face in his hands.

“Uncover your face—look at him! He’s a saint,” she said. “Oh! uncover
your face, do uncover it!” she said angrily. “Alexey Alexandrovitch, do
uncover his face! I want to see him.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch took Vronsky’s hands and drew them away from his
face, which was awful with the expression of agony and shame upon it.

“Give him your hand. Forgive him.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch gave him his hand, not attempting to restrain the
tears that streamed from his eyes.

“Thank God, thank God!” she said, “now everything is ready. Only to
stretch my legs a little. There, that’s capital. How badly these
flowers are done—not a bit like a violet,” she said, pointing to the
hangings. “My God, my God! when will it end? Give me some morphine.
Doctor, give me some morphine! Oh, my God, my God!”

And she tossed about on the bed.

The doctors said that it was puerperal fever, and that it was
ninety-nine chances in a hundred it would end in death. The whole day
long there was fever, delirium, and unconsciousness. At midnight the
patient lay without consciousness, and almost without pulse.

The end was expected every minute.

Vronsky had gone home, but in the morning he came to inquire, and
Alexey Alexandrovitch meeting him in the hall, said: “Better stay, she
might ask for you,” and himself led him to his wife’s boudoir. Towards
morning, there was a return again of excitement, rapid thought and
talk, and again it ended in unconsciousness. On the third day it was
the same thing, and the doctors said there was hope. That day Alexey
Alexandrovitch went into the boudoir where Vronsky was sitting, and
closing the door sat down opposite him.

“Alexey Alexandrovitch,” said Vronsky, feeling that a statement of the
position was coming, “I can’t speak, I can’t understand. Spare me!
However hard it is for you, believe me, it is more terrible for me.”

He would have risen; but Alexey Alexandrovitch took him by the hand and
said:

“I beg you to hear me out; it is necessary. I must explain my feelings,
the feelings that have guided me and will guide me, so that you may not
be in error regarding me. You know I had resolved on a divorce, and had
even begun to take proceedings. I won’t conceal from you that in
beginning this I was in uncertainty, I was in misery; I will confess
that I was pursued by a desire to revenge myself on you and on her.
When I got the telegram, I came here with the same feelings; I will say
more, I longed for her death. But....” He paused, pondering whether to
disclose or not to disclose his feeling to him. “But I saw her and
forgave her. And the happiness of forgiveness has revealed to me my
duty. I forgive completely. I would offer the other cheek, I would give
my cloak if my coat be taken. I pray to God only not to take from me
the bliss of forgiveness!”

Tears stood in his eyes, and the luminous, serene look in them
impressed Vronsky.

“This is my position: you can trample me in the mud, make me the
laughing-stock of the world, I will not abandon her, and I will never
utter a word of reproach to you,” Alexey Alexandrovitch went on. “My
duty is clearly marked for me; I ought to be with her, and I will be.
If she wishes to see you, I will let you know, but now I suppose it
would be better for you to go away.”

He got up, and sobs cut short his words. Vronsky too was getting up,
and in a stooping, not yet erect posture, looked up at him from under
his brows. He did not understand Alexey Alexandrovitch’s feeling, but
he felt that it was something higher and even unattainable for him with
his view of life.


Chapter 18

After the conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch, Vronsky went out
onto the steps of the Karenins’ house and stood still, with difficulty
remembering where he was, and where he ought to walk or drive. He felt
disgraced, humiliated, guilty, and deprived of all possibility of
washing away his humiliation. He felt thrust out of the beaten track
along which he had so proudly and lightly walked till then. All the
habits and rules of his life that had seemed so firm, had turned out
suddenly false and inapplicable. The betrayed husband, who had figured
till that time as a pitiful creature, an incidental and somewhat
ludicrous obstacle to his happiness, had suddenly been summoned by her
herself, elevated to an awe-inspiring pinnacle, and on the pinnacle
that husband had shown himself, not malignant, not false, not
ludicrous, but kind and straightforward and large. Vronsky could not
but feel this, and the parts were suddenly reversed. Vronsky felt his
elevation and his own abasement, his truth and his own falsehood. He
felt that the husband was magnanimous even in his sorrow, while he had
been base and petty in his deceit. But this sense of his own
humiliation before the man he had unjustly despised made up only a
small part of his misery. He felt unutterably wretched now, for his
passion for Anna, which had seemed to him of late to be growing cooler,
now that he knew he had lost her forever, was stronger than ever it had
been. He had seen all of her in her illness, had come to know her very
soul, and it seemed to him that he had never loved her till then. And
now when he had learned to know her, to love her as she should be
loved, he had been humiliated before her, and had lost her forever,
leaving with her nothing of himself but a shameful memory. Most
terrible of all had been his ludicrous, shameful position when Alexey
Alexandrovitch had pulled his hands away from his humiliated face. He
stood on the steps of the Karenins’ house like one distraught, and did
not know what to do.

“A sledge, sir?” asked the porter.

“Yes, a sledge.”

On getting home, after three sleepless nights, Vronsky, without
undressing, lay down flat on the sofa, clasping his hands and laying
his head on them. His head was heavy. Images, memories, and ideas of
the strangest description followed one another with extraordinary
rapidity and vividness. First it was the medicine he had poured out for
the patient and spilt over the spoon, then the midwife’s white hands,
then the queer posture of Alexey Alexandrovitch on the floor beside the
bed.

“To sleep! To forget!” he said to himself with the serene confidence of
a healthy man that if he is tired and sleepy, he will go to sleep at
once. And the same instant his head did begin to feel drowsy and he
began to drop off into forgetfulness. The waves of the sea of
unconsciousness had begun to meet over his head, when all at once—it
was as though a violent shock of electricity had passed over him. He
started so that he leaped up on the springs of the sofa, and leaning on
his arms got in a panic onto his knees. His eyes were wide open as
though he had never been asleep. The heaviness in his head and the
weariness in his limbs that he had felt a minute before had suddenly
gone.

“You may trample me in the mud,” he heard Alexey Alexandrovitch’s words
and saw him standing before him, and saw Anna’s face with its burning
flush and glittering eyes, gazing with love and tenderness not at him
but at Alexey Alexandrovitch; he saw his own, as he fancied, foolish
and ludicrous figure when Alexey Alexandrovitch took his hands away
from his face. He stretched out his legs again and flung himself on the
sofa in the same position and shut his eyes.

“To sleep! To forget!” he repeated to himself. But with his eyes shut
he saw more distinctly than ever Anna’s face as it had been on the
memorable evening before the races.

“That is not and will not be, and she wants to wipe it out of her
memory. But I cannot live without it. How can we be reconciled? how can
we be reconciled?” he said aloud, and unconsciously began to repeat
these words. This repetition checked the rising up of fresh images and
memories, which he felt were thronging in his brain. But repeating
words did not check his imagination for long. Again in extraordinarily
rapid succession his best moments rose before his mind, and then his
recent humiliation. “Take away his hands,” Anna’s voice says. He takes
away his hands and feels the shamestruck and idiotic expression of his
face.

He still lay down, trying to sleep, though he felt there was not the
smallest hope of it, and kept repeating stray words from some chain of
thought, trying by this to check the rising flood of fresh images. He
listened, and heard in a strange, mad whisper words repeated: “I did
not appreciate it, did not make enough of it. I did not appreciate it,
did not make enough of it.”

“What’s this? Am I going out of my mind?” he said to himself. “Perhaps.
What makes men go out of their minds; what makes men shoot themselves?”
he answered himself, and opening his eyes, he saw with wonder an
embroidered cushion beside him, worked by Varya, his brother’s wife. He
touched the tassel of the cushion, and tried to think of Varya, of when
he had seen her last. But to think of anything extraneous was an
agonizing effort. “No, I must sleep!” He moved the cushion up, and
pressed his head into it, but he had to make an effort to keep his eyes
shut. He jumped up and sat down. “That’s all over for me,” he said to
himself. “I must think what to do. What is left?” His mind rapidly ran
through his life apart from his love of Anna.

“Ambition? Serpuhovskoy? Society? The court?” He could not come to a
pause anywhere. All of it had had meaning before, but now there was no
reality in it. He got up from the sofa, took off his coat, undid his
belt, and uncovering his hairy chest to breathe more freely, walked up
and down the room. “This is how people go mad,” he repeated, “and how
they shoot themselves ... to escape humiliation,” he added slowly.

He went to the door and closed it, then with fixed eyes and clenched
teeth he went up to the table, took a revolver, looked round him,
turned it to a loaded barrel, and sank into thought. For two minutes,
his head bent forward with an expression of an intense effort of
thought, he stood with the revolver in his hand, motionless, thinking.

“Of course,” he said to himself, as though a logical, continuous, and
clear chain of reasoning had brought him to an indubitable conclusion.
In reality this “of course,” that seemed convincing to him, was simply
the result of exactly the same circle of memories and images through
which he had passed ten times already during the last hour—memories of
happiness lost forever. There was the same conception of the
senselessness of everything to come in life, the same consciousness of
humiliation. Even the sequence of these images and emotions was the
same.

“Of course,” he repeated, when for the third time his thought passed
again round the same spellbound circle of memories and images, and
pulling the revolver to the left side of his chest, and clutching it
vigorously with his whole hand, as it were, squeezing it in his fist,
he pulled the trigger. He did not hear the sound of the shot, but a
violent blow on his chest sent him reeling. He tried to clutch at the
edge of the table, dropped the revolver, staggered, and sat down on the
ground, looking about him in astonishment. He did not recognize his
room, looking up from the ground, at the bent legs of the table, at the
wastepaper basket, and the tiger-skin rug. The hurried, creaking steps
of his servant coming through the drawing-room brought him to his
senses. He made an effort at thought, and was aware that he was on the
floor; and seeing blood on the tiger-skin rug and on his arm, he knew
he had shot himself.

“Idiotic! Missed!” he said, fumbling after the revolver. The revolver
was close beside him—he sought further off. Still feeling for it, he
stretched out to the other side, and not being strong enough to keep
his balance, fell over, streaming with blood.

The elegant, whiskered manservant, who used to be continually
complaining to his acquaintances of the delicacy of his nerves, was so
panic-stricken on seeing his master lying on the floor, that he left
him losing blood while he ran for assistance. An hour later Varya, his
brother’s wife, had arrived, and with the assistance of three doctors,
whom she had sent for in all directions, and who all appeared at the
same moment, she got the wounded man to bed, and remained to nurse him.


Chapter 19

The mistake made by Alexey Alexandrovitch in that, when preparing for
seeing his wife, he had overlooked the possibility that her repentance
might be sincere, and he might forgive her, and she might not die—this
mistake was two months after his return from Moscow brought home to him
in all its significance. But the mistake made by him had arisen not
simply from his having overlooked that contingency, but also from the
fact that until that day of his interview with his dying wife, he had
not known his own heart. At his sick wife’s bedside he had for the
first time in his life given way to that feeling of sympathetic
suffering always roused in him by the sufferings of others, and
hitherto looked on by him with shame as a harmful weakness. And pity
for her, and remorse for having desired her death, and most of all, the
joy of forgiveness, made him at once conscious, not simply of the
relief of his own sufferings, but of a spiritual peace he had never
experienced before. He suddenly felt that the very thing that was the
source of his sufferings had become the source of his spiritual joy;
that what had seemed insoluble while he was judging, blaming, and
hating, had become clear and simple when he forgave and loved.

He forgave his wife and pitied her for her sufferings and her remorse.
He forgave Vronsky, and pitied him, especially after reports reached
him of his despairing action. He felt more for his son than before. And
he blamed himself now for having taken too little interest in him. But
for the little newborn baby he felt a quite peculiar sentiment, not of
pity, only, but of tenderness. At first, from a feeling of compassion
alone, he had been interested in the delicate little creature, who was
not his child, and who was cast on one side during her mother’s
illness, and would certainly have died if he had not troubled about
her, and he did not himself observe how fond he became of her. He would
go into the nursery several times a day, and sit there for a long
while, so that the nurses, who were at first afraid of him, got quite
used to his presence. Sometimes for half an hour at a stretch he would
sit silently gazing at the saffron-red, downy, wrinkled face of the
sleeping baby, watching the movements of the frowning brows, and the
fat little hands, with clenched fingers, that rubbed the little eyes
and nose. At such moments particularly, Alexey Alexandrovitch had a
sense of perfect peace and inward harmony, and saw nothing
extraordinary in his position, nothing that ought to be changed.

But as time went on, he saw more and more distinctly that however
natural the position now seemed to him, he would not long be allowed to
remain in it. He felt that besides the blessed spiritual force
controlling his soul, there was another, a brutal force, as powerful,
or more powerful, which controlled his life, and that this force would
not allow him that humble peace he longed for. He felt that everyone
was looking at him with inquiring wonder, that he was not understood,
and that something was expected of him. Above all, he felt the
instability and unnaturalness of his relations with his wife.

When the softening effect of the near approach of death had passed
away, Alexey Alexandrovitch began to notice that Anna was afraid of
him, ill at ease with him, and could not look him straight in the face.
She seemed to be wanting, and not daring, to tell him something; and as
though foreseeing their present relations could not continue, she
seemed to be expecting something from him.

Towards the end of February it happened that Anna’s baby daughter, who
had been named Anna too, fell ill. Alexey Alexandrovitch was in the
nursery in the morning, and leaving orders for the doctor to be sent
for, he went to his office. On finishing his work, he returned home at
four. Going into the hall he saw a handsome groom, in a braided livery
and a bear fur cape, holding a white fur cloak.

“Who is here?” asked Alexey Alexandrovitch.

“Princess Elizaveta Federovna Tverskaya,” the groom answered, and it
seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch that he grinned.

During all this difficult time Alexey Alexandrovitch had noticed that
his worldly acquaintances, especially women, took a peculiar interest
in him and his wife. All these acquaintances he observed with
difficulty concealing their mirth at something; the same mirth that he
had perceived in the lawyer’s eyes, and just now in the eyes of this
groom. Everyone seemed, somehow, hugely delighted, as though they had
just been at a wedding. When they met him, with ill-disguised enjoyment
they inquired after his wife’s health. The presence of Princess
Tverskaya was unpleasant to Alexey Alexandrovitch from the memories
associated with her, and also because he disliked her, and he went
straight to the nursery. In the day nursery Seryozha, leaning on the
table with his legs on a chair, was drawing and chatting away merrily.
The English governess, who had during Anna’s illness replaced the
French one, was sitting near the boy knitting a shawl. She hurriedly
got up, curtseyed, and pulled Seryozha.

Alexey Alexandrovitch stroked his son’s hair, answered the governess’s
inquiries about his wife, and asked what the doctor had said of the
baby.

“The doctor said it was nothing serious, and he ordered a bath, sir.”

“But she is still in pain,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, listening to
the baby’s screaming in the next room.

“I think it’s the wet-nurse, sir,” the Englishwoman said firmly.

“What makes you think so?” he asked, stopping short.

“It’s just as it was at Countess Paul’s, sir. They gave the baby
medicine, and it turned out that the baby was simply hungry: the nurse
had no milk, sir.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and after standing still a few seconds
he went in at the other door. The baby was lying with its head thrown
back, stiffening itself in the nurse’s arms, and would not take the
plump breast offered it; and it never ceased screaming in spite of the
double hushing of the wet-nurse and the other nurse, who was bending
over her.

“Still no better?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.

“She’s very restless,” answered the nurse in a whisper.

“Miss Edwarde says that perhaps the wet-nurse has no milk,” he said.

“I think so too, Alexey Alexandrovitch.”

“Then why didn’t you say so?”

“Who’s one to say it to? Anna Arkadyevna still ill....” said the nurse
discontentedly.

The nurse was an old servant of the family. And in her simple words
there seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch an allusion to his position.

The baby screamed louder than ever, struggling and sobbing. The nurse,
with a gesture of despair, went to it, took it from the wet-nurse’s
arms, and began walking up and down, rocking it.

“You must ask the doctor to examine the wet-nurse,” said Alexey
Alexandrovitch. The smartly dressed and healthy-looking nurse,
frightened at the idea of losing her place, muttered something to
herself, and covering her bosom, smiled contemptuously at the idea of
doubts being cast on her abundance of milk. In that smile, too, Alexey
Alexandrovitch saw a sneer at his position.

“Luckless child!” said the nurse, hushing the baby, and still walking
up and down with it.

Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, and with a despondent and suffering
face watched the nurse walking to and fro.

When the child at last was still, and had been put in a deep bed, and
the nurse, after smoothing the little pillow, had left her, Alexey
Alexandrovitch got up, and walking awkwardly on tiptoe, approached the
baby. For a minute he was still, and with the same despondent face
gazed at the baby; but all at once a smile, that moved his hair and the
skin of his forehead, came out on his face, and he went as softly out
of the room.

In the dining-room he rang the bell, and told the servant who came in
to send again for the doctor. He felt vexed with his wife for not being
anxious about this exquisite baby, and in this vexed humor he had no
wish to go to her; he had no wish, either, to see Princess Betsy. But
his wife might wonder why he did not go to her as usual; and so,
overcoming his disinclination, he went towards the bedroom. As he
walked over the soft rug towards the door, he could not help
overhearing a conversation he did not want to hear.

“If he hadn’t been going away, I could have understood your answer and
his too. But your husband ought to be above that,” Betsy was saying.

“It’s not for my husband; for myself I don’t wish it. Don’t say that!”
answered Anna’s excited voice.

“Yes, but you must care to say good-bye to a man who has shot himself
on your account....”

“That’s just why I don’t want to.”

With a dismayed and guilty expression, Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped
and would have gone back unobserved. But reflecting that this would be
undignified, he turned back again, and clearing his throat, he went up
to the bedroom. The voices were silent, and he went in.

Anna, in a gray dressing gown, with a crop of short clustering black
curls on her round head, was sitting on a settee. The eagerness died
out of her face, as it always did, at the sight of her husband; she
dropped her head and looked round uneasily at Betsy. Betsy, dressed in
the height of the latest fashion, in a hat that towered somewhere over
her head like a shade on a lamp, in a blue dress with violet crossway
stripes slanting one way on the bodice and the other way on the skirt,
was sitting beside Anna, her tall flat figure held erect. Bowing her
head, she greeted Alexey Alexandrovitch with an ironical smile.

“Ah!” she said, as though surprised. “I’m very glad you’re at home. You
never put in an appearance anywhere, and I haven’t seen you ever since
Anna has been ill. I have heard all about it—your anxiety. Yes, you’re
a wonderful husband!” she said, with a meaning and affable air, as
though she were bestowing an order of magnanimity on him for his
conduct to his wife.

Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed frigidly, and kissing his wife’s hand,
asked how she was.

“Better, I think,” she said, avoiding his eyes.

“But you’ve rather a feverish-looking color,” he said, laying stress on
the word “feverish.”

“We’ve been talking too much,” said Betsy. “I feel it’s selfishness on
my part, and I am going away.”

She got up, but Anna, suddenly flushing, quickly caught at her hand.

“No, wait a minute, please. I must tell you ... no, you.” she turned to
Alexey Alexandrovitch, and her neck and brow were suffused with
crimson. “I won’t and can’t keep anything secret from you,” she said.

Alexey Alexandrovitch cracked his fingers and bowed his head.

“Betsy’s been telling me that Count Vronsky wants to come here to say
good-bye before his departure for Tashkend.” She did not look at her
husband, and was evidently in haste to have everything out, however
hard it might be for her. “I told her I could not receive him.”

“You said, my dear, that it would depend on Alexey Alexandrovitch,”
Betsy corrected her.

“Oh, no, I can’t receive him; and what object would there....” She
stopped suddenly, and glanced inquiringly at her husband (he did not
look at her). “In short, I don’t wish it....”

Alexey Alexandrovitch advanced and would have taken her hand.

Her first impulse was to jerk back her hand from the damp hand with big
swollen veins that sought hers, but with an obvious effort to control
herself she pressed his hand.

“I am very grateful to you for your confidence, but....” he said,
feeling with confusion and annoyance that what he could decide easily
and clearly by himself, he could not discuss before Princess Tverskaya,
who to him stood for the incarnation of that brute force which would
inevitably control him in the life he led in the eyes of the world, and
hinder him from giving way to his feeling of love and forgiveness. He
stopped short, looking at Princess Tverskaya.

“Well, good-bye, my darling,” said Betsy, getting up. She kissed Anna,
and went out. Alexey Alexandrovitch escorted her out.

“Alexey Alexandrovitch! I know you are a truly magnanimous man,” said
Betsy, stopping in the little drawing-room, and with special warmth
shaking hands with him once more. “I am an outsider, but I so love her
and respect you that I venture to advise. Receive him. Alexey Vronsky
is the soul of honor, and he is going away to Tashkend.”

“Thank you, princess, for your sympathy and advice. But the question of
whether my wife can or cannot see anyone she must decide herself.”

He said this from habit, lifting his brows with dignity, and reflected
immediately that whatever his words might be, there could be no dignity
in his position. And he saw this by the suppressed, malicious, and
ironical smile with which Betsy glanced at him after this phrase.


Chapter 20

Alexey Alexandrovitch took leave of Betsy in the drawing-room, and went
to his wife. She was lying down, but hearing his steps she sat up
hastily in her former attitude, and looked in a scared way at him. He
saw she had been crying.

“I am very grateful for your confidence in me.” He repeated gently in
Russian the phrase he had said in Betsy’s presence in French, and sat
down beside her. When he spoke to her in Russian, using the Russian
“thou” of intimacy and affection, it was insufferably irritating to
Anna. “And I am very grateful for your decision. I, too, imagine that
since he is going away, there is no sort of necessity for Count Vronsky
to come here. However, if....”

“But I’ve said so already, so why repeat it?” Anna suddenly interrupted
him with an irritation she could not succeed in repressing. “No sort of
necessity,” she thought, “for a man to come and say good-bye to the
woman he loves, for whom he was ready to ruin himself, and has ruined
himself, and who cannot live without him. No sort of necessity!” she
compressed her lips, and dropped her burning eyes to his hands with
their swollen veins. They were rubbing each other.

“Let us never speak of it,” she added more calmly.

“I have left this question to you to decide, and I am very glad to
see....” Alexey Alexandrovitch was beginning.

“That my wish coincides with your own,” she finished quickly,
exasperated at his talking so slowly while she knew beforehand all he
would say.

“Yes,” he assented; “and Princess Tverskaya’s interference in the most
difficult private affairs is utterly uncalled for. She especially....”

“I don’t believe a word of what’s said about her,” said Anna quickly.
“I know she really cares for me.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed and said nothing. She played nervously
with the tassel of her dressing-gown, glancing at him with that
torturing sensation of physical repulsion for which she blamed herself,
though she could not control it. Her only desire now was to be rid of
his oppressive presence.

“I have just sent for the doctor,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.

“I am very well; what do I want the doctor for?”

“No, the little one cries, and they say the nurse hasn’t enough milk.”

“Why didn’t you let me nurse her, when I begged to? Anyway” (Alexey
Alexandrovitch knew what was meant by that “anyway”), “she’s a baby,
and they’re killing her.” She rang the bell and ordered the baby to be
brought her. “I begged to nurse her, I wasn’t allowed to, and now I’m
blamed for it.”

“I don’t blame....”

“Yes, you do blame me! My God! why didn’t I die!” And she broke into
sobs. “Forgive me, I’m nervous, I’m unjust,” she said, controlling
herself, “but do go away....”

“No, it can’t go on like this,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself
decidedly as he left his wife’s room.

Never had the impossibility of his position in the world’s eyes, and
his wife’s hatred of him, and altogether the might of that mysterious
brutal force that guided his life against his spiritual inclinations,
and exacted conformity with its decrees and change in his attitude to
his wife, been presented to him with such distinctness as that day. He
saw clearly that all the world and his wife expected of him something,
but what exactly, he could not make out. He felt that this was rousing
in his soul a feeling of anger destructive of his peace of mind and of
all the good of his achievement. He believed that for Anna herself it
would be better to break off all relations with Vronsky; but if they
all thought this out of the question, he was even ready to allow these
relations to be renewed, so long as the children were not disgraced,
and he was not deprived of them nor forced to change his position. Bad
as this might be, it was anyway better than a rupture, which would put
her in a hopeless and shameful position, and deprive him of everything
he cared for. But he felt helpless; he knew beforehand that everyone
was against him, and that he would not be allowed to do what seemed to
him now so natural and right, but would be forced to do what was wrong,
though it seemed the proper thing to them.


Chapter 21

Before Betsy had time to walk out of the drawing-room, she was met in
the doorway by Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just come from Yeliseev’s,
where a consignment of fresh oysters had been received.

“Ah! princess! what a delightful meeting!” he began. “I’ve been to see
you.”

“A meeting for one minute, for I’m going,” said Betsy, smiling and
putting on her glove.

“Don’t put on your glove yet, princess; let me kiss your hand. There’s
nothing I’m so thankful to the revival of the old fashions for as the
kissing the hand.” He kissed Betsy’s hand. “When shall we see each
other?”

“You don’t deserve it,” answered Betsy, smiling.

“Oh, yes, I deserve a great deal, for I’ve become a most serious
person. I don’t only manage my own affairs, but other people’s too,” he
said, with a significant expression.

“Oh, I’m so glad!” answered Betsy, at once understanding that he was
speaking of Anna. And going back into the drawing-room, they stood in a
corner. “He’s killing her,” said Betsy in a whisper full of meaning.
“It’s impossible, impossible....”

“I’m so glad you think so,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, shaking his head
with a serious and sympathetically distressed expression, “that’s what
I’ve come to Petersburg for.”

“The whole town’s talking of it,” she said. “It’s an impossible
position. She pines and pines away. He doesn’t understand that she’s
one of those women who can’t trifle with their feelings. One of two
things: either let him take her away, act with energy, or give her a
divorce. This is stifling her.”

“Yes, yes ... just so....” Oblonsky said, sighing. “That’s what I’ve
come for. At least not solely for that ... I’ve been made a
_Kammerherr_; of course, one has to say thank you. But the chief thing
was having to settle this.”

“Well, God help you!” said Betsy.

After accompanying Betsy to the outside hall, once more kissing her
hand above the glove, at the point where the pulse beats, and murmuring
to her such unseemly nonsense that she did not know whether to laugh or
be angry, Stepan Arkadyevitch went to his sister. He found her in
tears.

Although he happened to be bubbling over with good spirits, Stepan
Arkadyevitch immediately and quite naturally fell into the sympathetic,
poetically emotional tone which harmonized with her mood. He asked her
how she was, and how she had spent the morning.

“Very, very miserably. Today and this morning and all past days and
days to come,” she said.

“I think you’re giving way to pessimism. You must rouse yourself, you
must look life in the face. I know it’s hard, but....”

“I have heard it said that women love men even for their vices,” Anna
began suddenly, “but I hate him for his virtues. I can’t live with him.
Do you understand? the sight of him has a physical effect on me, it
makes me beside myself. I can’t, I can’t live with him. What am I to
do? I have been unhappy, and used to think one couldn’t be more
unhappy, but the awful state of things I am going through now, I could
never have conceived. Would you believe it, that knowing he’s a good
man, a splendid man, that I’m not worth his little finger, still I hate
him. I hate him for his generosity. And there’s nothing left for me
but....”

She would have said death, but Stepan Arkadyevitch would not let her
finish.

“You are ill and overwrought,” he said; “believe me, you’re
exaggerating dreadfully. There’s nothing so terrible in it.”

And Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. No one else in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s
place, having to do with such despair, would have ventured to smile
(the smile would have seemed brutal); but in his smile there was so
much of sweetness and almost feminine tenderness that his smile did not
wound, but softened and soothed. His gentle, soothing words and smiles
were as soothing and softening as almond oil. And Anna soon felt this.

“No, Stiva,” she said, “I’m lost, lost! worse than lost! I can’t say
yet that all is over; on the contrary, I feel that it’s not over. I’m
an overstrained string that must snap. But it’s not ended yet ... and
it will have a fearful end.”

“No matter, we must let the string be loosened, little by little.
There’s no position from which there is no way of escape.”

“I have thought, and thought. Only one....”

Again he knew from her terrified eyes that this one way of escape in
her thought was death, and he would not let her say it.

“Not at all,” he said. “Listen to me. You can’t see your own position
as I can. Let me tell you candidly my opinion.” Again he smiled
discreetly his almond-oil smile. “I’ll begin from the beginning. You
married a man twenty years older than yourself. You married him without
love and not knowing what love was. It was a mistake, let’s admit.”

“A fearful mistake!” said Anna.

“But I repeat, it’s an accomplished fact. Then you had, let us say, the
misfortune to love a man not your husband. That was a misfortune; but
that, too, is an accomplished fact. And your husband knew it and
forgave it.” He stopped at each sentence, waiting for her to object,
but she made no answer. “That’s so. Now the question is: can you go on
living with your husband? Do you wish it? Does he wish it?”

“I know nothing, nothing.”

“But you said yourself that you can’t endure him.”

“No, I didn’t say so. I deny it. I can’t tell, I don’t know anything
about it.”

“Yes, but let....”

“You can’t understand. I feel I’m lying head downwards in a sort of
pit, but I ought not to save myself. And I can’t....”

“Never mind, we’ll slip something under and pull you out. I understand
you: I understand that you can’t take it on yourself to express your
wishes, your feelings.”

“There’s nothing, nothing I wish ... except for it to be all over.”

“But he sees this and knows it. And do you suppose it weighs on him any
less than on you? You’re wretched, he’s wretched, and what good can
come of it? while divorce would solve the difficulty completely.” With
some effort Stepan Arkadyevitch brought out his central idea, and
looked significantly at her.

She said nothing, and shook her cropped head in dissent. But from the
look in her face, that suddenly brightened into its old beauty, he saw
that if she did not desire this, it was simply because it seemed to her
unattainable happiness.

“I’m awfully sorry for you! And how happy I should be if I could
arrange things!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling more boldly. “Don’t
speak, don’t say a word! God grant only that I may speak as I feel. I’m
going to him.”

Anna looked at him with dreamy, shining eyes, and said nothing.


Chapter 22

Stepan Arkadyevitch, with the same somewhat solemn expression with
which he used to take his presidential chair at his board, walked into
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s room. Alexey Alexandrovitch was walking about
his room with his hands behind his back, thinking of just what Stepan
Arkadyevitch had been discussing with his wife.

“I’m not interrupting you?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, on the sight of
his brother-in-law becoming suddenly aware of a sense of embarrassment
unusual with him. To conceal this embarrassment he took out a cigarette
case he had just bought that opened in a new way, and sniffing the
leather, took a cigarette out of it.

“No. Do you want anything?” Alexey Alexandrovitch asked without
eagerness.

“Yes, I wished ... I wanted ... yes, I wanted to talk to you,” said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, with surprise aware of an unaccustomed timidity.

This feeling was so unexpected and so strange that he did not believe
it was the voice of conscience telling him that what he was meaning to
do was wrong.

Stepan Arkadyevitch made an effort and struggled with the timidity that
had come over him.

“I hope you believe in my love for my sister and my sincere affection
and respect for you,” he said, reddening.

Alexey Alexandrovitch stood still and said nothing, but his face struck
Stepan Arkadyevitch by its expression of an unresisting sacrifice.

“I intended ... I wanted to have a little talk with you about my sister
and your mutual position,” he said, still struggling with an
unaccustomed constraint.

Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled mournfully, looked at his brother-in-law,
and without answering went up to the table, took from it an unfinished
letter, and handed it to his brother-in-law.

“I think unceasingly of the same thing. And here is what I had begun
writing, thinking I could say it better by letter, and that my presence
irritates her,” he said, as he gave him the letter.

Stepan Arkadyevitch took the letter, looked with incredulous surprise
at the lusterless eyes fixed so immovably on him, and began to read.

“I see that my presence is irksome to you. Painful as it is to me to
believe it, I see that it is so, and cannot be otherwise. I don’t blame
you, and God is my witness that on seeing you at the time of your
illness I resolved with my whole heart to forget all that had passed
between us and to begin a new life. I do not regret, and shall never
regret, what I have done; but I have desired one thing—your good, the
good of your soul—and now I see I have not attained that. Tell me
yourself what will give you true happiness and peace to your soul. I
put myself entirely in your hands, and trust to your feeling of what’s
right.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch handed back the letter, and with the same surprise
continued looking at his brother-in-law, not knowing what to say. This
silence was so awkward for both of them that Stepan Arkadyevitch’s lips
began twitching nervously, while he still gazed without speaking at
Karenin’s face.

“That’s what I wanted to say to her,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
turning away.

“Yes, yes....” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, not able to answer for the
tears that were choking him.

“Yes, yes, I understand you,” he brought out at last.

“I want to know what she would like,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.

“I am afraid she does not understand her own position. She is not a
judge,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, recovering himself. “She is crushed,
simply crushed by your generosity. If she were to read this letter, she
would be incapable of saying anything, she would only hang her head
lower than ever.”

“Yes, but what’s to be done in that case? how explain, how find out her
wishes?”

“If you will allow me to give my opinion, I think that it lies with you
to point out directly the steps you consider necessary to end the
position.”

“So you consider it must be ended?” Alexey Alexandrovitch interrupted
him. “But how?” he added, with a gesture of his hands before his eyes
not usual with him. “I see no possible way out of it.”

“There is some way of getting out of every position,” said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, standing up and becoming more cheerful. “There was a time
when you thought of breaking off.... If you are convinced now that you
cannot make each other happy....”

“Happiness may be variously understood. But suppose that I agree to
everything, that I want nothing: what way is there of getting out of
our position?”

“If you care to know my opinion,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with the
same smile of softening, almond-oil tenderness with which he had been
talking to Anna. His kindly smile was so winning that Alexey
Alexandrovitch, feeling his own weakness and unconsciously swayed by
it, was ready to believe what Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying.

“She will never speak out about it. But one thing is possible, one
thing she might desire,” he went on, “that is the cessation of your
relations and all memories associated with them. To my thinking, in
your position what’s essential is the formation of a new attitude to
one another. And that can only rest on a basis of freedom on both
sides.”

“Divorce,” Alexey Alexandrovitch interrupted, in a tone of aversion.

“Yes, I imagine that divorce—yes, divorce,” Stepan Arkadyevitch
repeated, reddening. “That is from every point of view the most
rational course for married people who find themselves in the position
you are in. What can be done if married people find that life is
impossible for them together? That may always happen.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed heavily and closed his eyes.

“There’s only one point to be considered: is either of the parties
desirous of forming new ties? If not, it is very simple,” said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, feeling more and more free from constraint.

Alexey Alexandrovitch, scowling with emotion, muttered something to
himself, and made no answer. All that seemed so simple to Stepan
Arkadyevitch, Alexey Alexandrovitch had thought over thousands of
times. And, so far from being simple, it all seemed to him utterly
impossible. Divorce, the details of which he knew by this time, seemed
to him now out of the question, because the sense of his own dignity
and respect for religion forbade his taking upon himself a fictitious
charge of adultery, and still more suffering his wife, pardoned and
beloved by him, to be caught in the fact and put to public shame.
Divorce appeared to him impossible also on other still more weighty
grounds.

What would become of his son in case of a divorce? To leave him with
his mother was out of the question. The divorced mother would have her
own illegitimate family, in which his position as a stepson and his
education would not be good. Keep him with him? He knew that would be
an act of vengeance on his part, and that he did not want. But apart
from this, what more than all made divorce seem impossible to Alexey
Alexandrovitch was, that by consenting to a divorce he would be
completely ruining Anna. The saying of Darya Alexandrovna at Moscow,
that in deciding on a divorce he was thinking of himself, and not
considering that by this he would be ruining her irrevocably, had sunk
into his heart. And connecting this saying with his forgiveness of her,
with his devotion to the children, he understood it now in his own way.
To consent to a divorce, to give her her freedom, meant in his thoughts
to take from himself the last tie that bound him to life—the children
whom he loved; and to take from her the last prop that stayed her on
the path of right, to thrust her down to her ruin. If she were
divorced, he knew she would join her life to Vronsky’s, and their tie
would be an illegitimate and criminal one, since a wife, by the
interpretation of the ecclesiastical law, could not marry while her
husband was living. “She will join him, and in a year or two he will
throw her over, or she will form a new tie,” thought Alexey
Alexandrovitch. “And I, by agreeing to an unlawful divorce, shall be to
blame for her ruin.” He had thought it all over hundreds of times, and
was convinced that a divorce was not at all simple, as Stepan
Arkadyevitch had said, but was utterly impossible. He did not believe a
single word Stepan Arkadyevitch said to him; to every word he had a
thousand objections to make, but he listened to him, feeling that his
words were the expression of that mighty brutal force which controlled
his life and to which he would have to submit.

“The only question is on what terms you agree to give her a divorce.
She does not want anything, does not dare ask you for anything, she
leaves it all to your generosity.”

“My God, my God! what for?” thought Alexey Alexandrovitch, remembering
the details of divorce proceedings in which the husband took the blame
on himself, and with just the same gesture with which Vronsky had done
the same, he hid his face for shame in his hands.

“You are distressed, I understand that. But if you think it over....”

“Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other
also; and if any man take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also,”
thought Alexey Alexandrovitch.

“Yes, yes!” he cried in a shrill voice. “I will take the disgrace on
myself, I will give up even my son, but ... but wouldn’t it be better
to let it alone? Still you may do as you like....”

And turning away so that his brother-in-law could not see him, he sat
down on a chair at the window. There was bitterness, there was shame in
his heart, but with bitterness and shame he felt joy and emotion at the
height of his own meekness.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was touched. He was silent for a space.

“Alexey Alexandrovitch, believe me, she appreciates your generosity,”
he said. “But it seems it was the will of God,” he added, and as he
said it felt how foolish a remark it was, and with difficulty repressed
a smile at his own foolishness.

Alexey Alexandrovitch would have made some reply, but tears stopped
him.

“This is an unhappy fatality, and one must accept it as such. I accept
the calamity as an accomplished fact, and am doing my best to help both
her and you,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

When he went out of his brother-in-law’s room he was touched, but that
did not prevent him from being glad he had successfully brought the
matter to a conclusion, for he felt certain Alexey Alexandrovitch would
not go back on his words. To this satisfaction was added the fact that
an idea had just struck him for a riddle turning on his successful
achievement, that when the affair was over he would ask his wife and
most intimate friends. He put this riddle into two or three different
ways. “But I’ll work it out better than that,” he said to himself with
a smile.


Chapter 23

Vronsky’s wound had been a dangerous one, though it did not touch the
heart, and for several days he had lain between life and death. The
first time he was able to speak, Varya, his brother’s wife, was alone
in the room.

“Varya,” he said, looking sternly at her, “I shot myself by accident.
And please never speak of it, and tell everyone so. Or else it’s too
ridiculous.”

Without answering his words, Varya bent over him, and with a delighted
smile gazed into his face. His eyes were clear, not feverish; but their
expression was stern.

“Thank God!” she said. “You’re not in pain?”

“A little here.” He pointed to his breast.

“Then let me change your bandages.”

In silence, stiffening his broad jaws, he looked at her while she
bandaged him up. When she had finished he said:

“I’m not delirious. Please manage that there may be no talk of my
having shot myself on purpose.”

“No one does say so. Only I hope you won’t shoot yourself by accident
any more,” she said, with a questioning smile.

“Of course I won’t, but it would have been better....”

And he smiled gloomily.

In spite of these words and this smile, which so frightened Varya, when
the inflammation was over and he began to recover, he felt that he was
completely free from one part of his misery. By his action he had, as
it were, washed away the shame and humiliation he had felt before. He
could now think calmly of Alexey Alexandrovitch. He recognized all his
magnanimity, but he did not now feel himself humiliated by it. Besides,
he got back again into the beaten track of his life. He saw the
possibility of looking men in the face again without shame, and he
could live in accordance with his own habits. One thing he could not
pluck out of his heart, though he never ceased struggling with it, was
the regret, amounting to despair, that he had lost her forever. That
now, having expiated his sin against the husband, he was bound to
renounce her, and never in future to stand between her with her
repentance and her husband, he had firmly decided in his heart; but he
could not tear out of his heart his regret at the loss of her love, he
could not erase from his memory those moments of happiness that he had
so little prized at the time, and that haunted him in all their charm.

Serpuhovskoy had planned his appointment at Tashkend, and Vronsky
agreed to the proposition without the slightest hesitation. But the
nearer the time of departure came, the bitterer was the sacrifice he
was making to what he thought his duty.

His wound had healed, and he was driving about making preparations for
his departure for Tashkend.

“To see her once and then to bury myself, to die,” he thought, and as
he was paying farewell visits, he uttered this thought to Betsy.
Charged with this commission, Betsy had gone to Anna, and brought him
back a negative reply.

“So much the better,” thought Vronsky, when he received the news. “It
was a weakness, which would have shattered what strength I have left.”

Next day Betsy herself came to him in the morning, and announced that
she had heard through Oblonsky as a positive fact that Alexey
Alexandrovitch had agreed to a divorce, and that therefore Vronsky
could see Anna.

Without even troubling himself to see Betsy out of his flat, forgetting
all his resolutions, without asking when he could see her, where her
husband was, Vronsky drove straight to the Karenins’. He ran up the
stairs seeing no one and nothing, and with a rapid step, almost
breaking into a run, he went into her room. And without considering,
without noticing whether there was anyone in the room or not, he flung
his arms round her, and began to cover her face, her hands, her neck
with kisses.

Anna had been preparing herself for this meeting, had thought what she
would say to him, but she did not succeed in saying anything of it; his
passion mastered her. She tried to calm him, to calm herself, but it
was too late. His feeling infected her. Her lips trembled so that for a
long while she could say nothing.

“Yes, you have conquered me, and I am yours,” she said at last,
pressing his hands to her bosom.

“So it had to be,” he said. “So long as we live, it must be so. I know
it now.”

“That’s true,” she said, getting whiter and whiter, and embracing his
head. “Still there is something terrible in it after all that has
happened.”

“It will all pass, it will all pass; we shall be so happy. Our love, if
it could be stronger, will be strengthened by there being something
terrible in it,” he said, lifting his head and parting his strong teeth
in a smile.

And she could not but respond with a smile—not to his words, but to the
love in his eyes. She took his hand and stroked her chilled cheeks and
cropped head with it.

“I don’t know you with this short hair. You’ve grown so pretty. A boy.
But how pale you are!”

“Yes, I’m very weak,” she said, smiling. And her lips began trembling
again.

“We’ll go to Italy; you will get strong,” he said.

“Can it be possible we could be like husband and wife, alone, your
family with you?” she said, looking close into his eyes.

“It only seems strange to me that it can ever have been otherwise.”

“Stiva says that _he_ has agreed to everything, but I can’t accept
_his_ generosity,” she said, looking dreamily past Vronsky’s face. “I
don’t want a divorce; it’s all the same to me now. Only I don’t know
what he will decide about Seryozha.”

He could not conceive how at this moment of their meeting she could
remember and think of her son, of divorce. What did it all matter?

“Don’t speak of that, don’t think of it,” he said, turning her hand in
his, and trying to draw her attention to him; but still she did not
look at him.

“Oh, why didn’t I die! it would have been better,” she said, and silent
tears flowed down both her cheeks; but she tried to smile, so as not to
wound him.

To decline the flattering and dangerous appointment at Tashkend would
have been, Vronsky had till then considered, disgraceful and
impossible. But now, without an instant’s consideration, he declined
it, and observing dissatisfaction in the most exalted quarters at this
step, he immediately retired from the army.

A month later Alexey Alexandrovitch was left alone with his son in his
house at Petersburg, while Anna and Vronsky had gone abroad, not having
obtained a divorce, but having absolutely declined all idea of one.




PART FIVE

Chapter 1


Princess Shtcherbatskaya considered that it was out of the question for
the wedding to take place before Lent, just five weeks off, since not
half the trousseau could possibly be ready by that time. But she could
not but agree with Levin that to fix it for after Lent would be putting
it off too late, as an old aunt of Prince Shtcherbatsky’s was seriously
ill and might die, and then the mourning would delay the wedding still
longer. And therefore, deciding to divide the trousseau into two
parts—a larger and smaller trousseau—the princess consented to have the
wedding before Lent. She determined that she would get the smaller part
of the trousseau all ready now, and the larger part should be made
later, and she was much vexed with Levin because he was incapable of
giving her a serious answer to the question whether he agreed to this
arrangement or not. The arrangement was the more suitable as,
immediately after the wedding, the young people were to go to the
country, where the more important part of the trousseau would not be
wanted.

Levin still continued in the same delirious condition in which it
seemed to him that he and his happiness constituted the chief and sole
aim of all existence, and that he need not now think or care about
anything, that everything was being done and would be done for him by
others. He had not even plans and aims for the future, he left its
arrangement to others, knowing that everything would be delightful. His
brother Sergey Ivanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch, and the princess guided
him in doing what he had to do. All he did was to agree entirely with
everything suggested to him. His brother raised money for him, the
princess advised him to leave Moscow after the wedding. Stepan
Arkadyevitch advised him to go abroad. He agreed to everything. “Do
what you choose, if it amuses you. I’m happy, and my happiness can be
no greater and no less for anything you do,” he thought. When he told
Kitty of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s advice that they should go abroad, he
was much surprised that she did not agree to this, and had some
definite requirements of her own in regard to their future. She knew
Levin had work he loved in the country. She did not, as he saw,
understand this work, she did not even care to understand it. But that
did not prevent her from regarding it as a matter of great importance.
And then she knew their home would be in the country, and she wanted to
go, not abroad where she was not going to live, but to the place where
their home would be. This definitely expressed purpose astonished
Levin. But since he did not care either way, he immediately asked
Stepan Arkadyevitch, as though it were his duty, to go down to the
country and to arrange everything there to the best of his ability with
the taste of which he had so much.

“But I say,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said to him one day after he had come
back from the country, where he had got everything ready for the young
people’s arrival, “have you a certificate of having been at
confession?”

“No. But what of it?”

“You can’t be married without it.”

“_Aïe, aïe, aïe!_” cried Levin. “Why, I believe it’s nine years since
I’ve taken the sacrament! I never thought of it.”

“You’re a pretty fellow!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch laughing, “and you
call me a Nihilist! But this won’t do, you know. You must take the
sacrament.”

“When? There are four days left now.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch arranged this also, and Levin had to go to
confession. To Levin, as to any unbeliever who respects the beliefs of
others, it was exceedingly disagreeable to be present at and take part
in church ceremonies. At this moment, in his present softened state of
feeling, sensitive to everything, this inevitable act of hypocrisy was
not merely painful to Levin, it seemed to him utterly impossible. Now,
in the heyday of his highest glory, his fullest flower, he would have
to be a liar or a scoffer. He felt incapable of being either. But
though he repeatedly plied Stepan Arkadyevitch with questions as to the
possibility of obtaining a certificate without actually communicating,
Stepan Arkadyevitch maintained that it was out of the question.

“Besides, what is it to you—two days? And he’s an awfully nice clever
old fellow. He’ll pull the tooth out for you so gently, you won’t
notice it.”

Standing at the first litany, Levin attempted to revive in himself his
youthful recollections of the intense religious emotion he had passed
through between the ages of sixteen and seventeen.

But he was at once convinced that it was utterly impossible to him. He
attempted to look at it all as an empty custom, having no sort of
meaning, like the custom of paying calls. But he felt that he could not
do that either. Levin found himself, like the majority of his
contemporaries, in the vaguest position in regard to religion. Believe
he could not, and at the same time he had no firm conviction that it
was all wrong. And consequently, not being able to believe in the
significance of what he was doing nor to regard it with indifference as
an empty formality, during the whole period of preparing for the
sacrament he was conscious of a feeling of discomfort and shame at
doing what he did not himself understand, and what, as an inner voice
told him, was therefore false and wrong.

During the service he would first listen to the prayers, trying to
attach some meaning to them not discordant with his own views; then
feeling that he could not understand and must condemn them, he tried
not to listen to them, but to attend to the thoughts, observations, and
memories which floated through his brain with extreme vividness during
this idle time of standing in church.

He had stood through the litany, the evening service and the midnight
service, and the next day he got up earlier than usual, and without
having tea went at eight o’clock in the morning to the church for the
morning service and the confession.

There was no one in the church but a beggar soldier, two old women, and
the church officials. A young deacon, whose long back showed in two
distinct halves through his thin undercassock, met him, and at once
going to a little table at the wall read the exhortation. During the
reading, especially at the frequent and rapid repetition of the same
words, “Lord, have mercy on us!” which resounded with an echo, Levin
felt that thought was shut and sealed up, and that it must not be
touched or stirred now or confusion would be the result; and so
standing behind the deacon he went on thinking of his own affairs,
neither listening nor examining what was said. “It’s wonderful what
expression there is in her hand,” he thought, remembering how they had
been sitting the day before at a corner table. They had nothing to talk
about, as was almost always the case at this time, and laying her hand
on the table she kept opening and shutting it, and laughed herself as
she watched her action. He remembered how he had kissed it and then had
examined the lines on the pink palm. “Have mercy on us again!” thought
Levin, crossing himself, bowing, and looking at the supple spring of
the deacon’s back bowing before him. “She took my hand then and
examined the lines. ‘You’ve got a splendid hand,’ she said.” And he
looked at his own hand and the short hand of the deacon. “Yes, now it
will soon be over,” he thought. “No, it seems to be beginning again,”
he thought, listening to the prayers. “No, it’s just ending: there he
is bowing down to the ground. That’s always at the end.”

The deacon’s hand in a plush cuff accepted a three-rouble note
unobtrusively, and the deacon said he would put it down in the
register, and his new boots creaking jauntily over the flagstones of
the empty church, he went to the altar. A moment later he peeped out
thence and beckoned to Levin. Thought, till then locked up, began to
stir in Levin’s head, but he made haste to drive it away. “It will come
right somehow,” he thought, and went towards the altar-rails. He went
up the steps, and turning to the right saw the priest. The priest, a
little old man with a scanty grizzled beard and weary, good-natured
eyes, was standing at the altar-rails, turning over the pages of a
missal. With a slight bow to Levin he began immediately reading prayers
in the official voice. When he had finished them he bowed down to the
ground and turned, facing Levin.

“Christ is present here unseen, receiving your confession,” he said,
pointing to the crucifix. “Do you believe in all the doctrines of the
Holy Apostolic Church?” the priest went on, turning his eyes away from
Levin’s face and folding his hands under his stole.

“I have doubted, I doubt everything,” said Levin in a voice that jarred
on himself, and he ceased speaking.

The priest waited a few seconds to see if he would not say more, and
closing his eyes he said quickly, with a broad, Vladimirsky accent:

“Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind, but we must pray that God
in His mercy will strengthen us. What are your special sins?” he added,
without the slightest interval, as though anxious not to waste time.

“My chief sin is doubt. I have doubts of everything, and for the most
part I am in doubt.”

“Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind,” the priest repeated the
same words. “What do you doubt about principally?”

“I doubt of everything. I sometimes even have doubts of the existence
of God,” Levin could not help saying, and he was horrified at the
impropriety of what he was saying. But Levin’s words did not, it
seemed, make much impression on the priest.

“What sort of doubt can there be of the existence of God?” he said
hurriedly, with a just perceptible smile.

Levin did not speak.

“What doubt can you have of the Creator when you behold His creation?”
the priest went on in the rapid customary jargon. “Who has decked the
heavenly firmament with its lights? Who has clothed the earth in its
beauty? How explain it without the Creator?” he said, looking
inquiringly at Levin.

Levin felt that it would be improper to enter upon a metaphysical
discussion with the priest, and so he said in reply merely what was a
direct answer to the question.

“I don’t know,” he said.

“You don’t know! Then how can you doubt that God created all?” the
priest said, with good-humored perplexity.

“I don’t understand it at all,” said Levin, blushing, and feeling that
his words were stupid, and that they could not be anything but stupid
in such a position.

“Pray to God and beseech Him. Even the holy fathers had doubts, and
prayed to God to strengthen their faith. The devil has great power, and
we must resist him. Pray to God, beseech Him. Pray to God,” he repeated
hurriedly.

The priest paused for some time, as though meditating.

“You’re about, I hear, to marry the daughter of my parishioner and son
in the spirit, Prince Shtcherbatsky?” he resumed, with a smile. “An
excellent young lady.”

“Yes,” answered Levin, blushing for the priest. “What does he want to
ask me about this at confession for?” he thought.

And, as though answering his thought, the priest said to him:

“You are about to enter into holy matrimony, and God may bless you with
offspring. Well, what sort of bringing-up can you give your babes if
you do not overcome the temptation of the devil, enticing you to
infidelity?” he said, with gentle reproachfulness. “If you love your
child as a good father, you will not desire only wealth, luxury, honor
for your infant; you will be anxious for his salvation, his spiritual
enlightenment with the light of truth. Eh? What answer will you make
him when the innocent babe asks you: ‘Papa! who made all that enchants
me in this world—the earth, the waters, the sun, the flowers, the
grass?’ Can you say to him: ‘I don’t know’? You cannot but know, since
the Lord God in His infinite mercy has revealed it to us. Or your child
will ask you: ‘What awaits me in the life beyond the tomb?’ What will
you say to him when you know nothing? How will you answer him? Will you
leave him to the allurements of the world and the devil? That’s not
right,” he said, and he stopped, putting his head on one side and
looking at Levin with his kindly, gentle eyes.

Levin made no answer this time, not because he did not want to enter
upon a discussion with the priest, but because, so far, no one had ever
asked him such questions, and when his babes did ask him those
questions, it would be time enough to think about answering them.

“You are entering upon a time of life,” pursued the priest, “when you
must choose your path and keep to it. Pray to God that He may in His
mercy aid you and have mercy on you!” he concluded. “Our Lord and God,
Jesus Christ, in the abundance and riches of His loving-kindness,
forgives this child....” and, finishing the prayer of absolution, the
priest blessed him and dismissed him.

On getting home that day, Levin had a delightful sense of relief at the
awkward position being over and having been got through without his
having to tell a lie. Apart from this, there remained a vague memory
that what the kind, nice old fellow had said had not been at all so
stupid as he had fancied at first, and that there was something in it
that must be cleared up.

“Of course, not now,” thought Levin, “but some day later on.” Levin
felt more than ever now that there was something not clear and not
clean in his soul, and that, in regard to religion, he was in the same
position which he perceived so clearly and disliked in others, and for
which he blamed his friend Sviazhsky.

Levin spent that evening with his betrothed at Dolly’s, and was in very
high spirits. To explain to Stepan Arkadyevitch the state of excitement
in which he found himself, he said that he was happy like a dog being
trained to jump through a hoop, who, having at last caught the idea,
and done what was required of him, whines and wags its tail, and jumps
up to the table and the windows in its delight.


Chapter 2

On the day of the wedding, according to the Russian custom (the
princess and Darya Alexandrovna insisted on strictly keeping all the
customs), Levin did not see his betrothed, and dined at his hotel with
three bachelor friends, casually brought together at his rooms. These
were Sergey Ivanovitch, Katavasov, a university friend, now professor
of natural science, whom Levin had met in the street and insisted on
taking home with him, and Tchirikov, his best man, a Moscow
conciliation-board judge, Levin’s companion in his bear-hunts. The
dinner was a very merry one: Sergey Ivanovitch was in his happiest
mood, and was much amused by Katavasov’s originality. Katavasov,
feeling his originality was appreciated and understood, made the most
of it. Tchirikov always gave a lively and good-humored support to
conversation of any sort.

“See, now,” said Katavasov, drawling his words from a habit acquired in
the lecture-room, “what a capable fellow was our friend Konstantin
Dmitrievitch. I’m not speaking of present company, for he’s absent. At
the time he left the university he was fond of science, took an
interest in humanity; now one-half of his abilities is devoted to
deceiving himself, and the other to justifying the deceit.”

“A more determined enemy of matrimony than you I never saw,” said
Sergey Ivanovitch.

“Oh, no, I’m not an enemy of matrimony. I’m in favor of division of
labor. People who can do nothing else ought to rear people while the
rest work for their happiness and enlightenment. That’s how I look at
it. To muddle up two trades is the error of the amateur; I’m not one of
their number.”

“How happy I shall be when I hear that you’re in love!” said Levin.
“Please invite me to the wedding.”

“I’m in love now.”

“Yes, with a cuttlefish! You know,” Levin turned to his brother,
“Mihail Semyonovitch is writing a work on the digestive organs of
the....”

“Now, make a muddle of it! It doesn’t matter what about. And the fact
is, I certainly do love cuttlefish.”

“But that’s no hindrance to your loving your wife.”

“The cuttlefish is no hindrance. The wife is the hindrance.”

“Why so?”

“Oh, you’ll see! You care about farming, hunting,—well, you’d better
look out!”

“Arhip was here today; he said there were a lot of elks in Prudno, and
two bears,” said Tchirikov.

“Well, you must go and get them without me.”

“Ah, that’s the truth,” said Sergey Ivanovitch. “And you may say
good-bye to bear-hunting for the future—your wife won’t allow it!”

Levin smiled. The picture of his wife not letting him go was so
pleasant that he was ready to renounce the delights of looking upon
bears forever.

“Still, it’s a pity they should get those two bears without you. Do you
remember last time at Hapilovo? That was a delightful hunt!” said
Tchirikov.

Levin had not the heart to disillusion him of the notion that there
could be something delightful apart from her, and so said nothing.

“There’s some sense in this custom of saying good-bye to bachelor
life,” said Sergey Ivanovitch. “However happy you may be, you must
regret your freedom.”

“And confess there is a feeling that you want to jump out of the
window, like Gogol’s bridegroom?”

“Of course there is, but it isn’t confessed,” said Katavasov, and he
broke into loud laughter.

“Oh, well, the window’s open. Let’s start off this instant to Tver!
There’s a big she-bear; one can go right up to the lair. Seriously,
let’s go by the five o’clock! And here let them do what they like,”
said Tchirikov, smiling.

“Well, now, on my honor,” said Levin, smiling, “I can’t find in my
heart that feeling of regret for my freedom.”

“Yes, there’s such a chaos in your heart just now that you can’t find
anything there,” said Katavasov. “Wait a bit, when you set it to rights
a little, you’ll find it!”

“No; if so, I should have felt a little, apart from my feeling” (he
could not say love before them) “and happiness, a certain regret at
losing my freedom.... On the contrary, I am glad at the very loss of my
freedom.”

“Awful! It’s a hopeless case!” said Katavasov. “Well, let’s drink to
his recovery, or wish that a hundredth part of his dreams may be
realized—and that would be happiness such as never has been seen on
earth!”

Soon after dinner the guests went away to be in time to be dressed for
the wedding.

When he was left alone, and recalled the conversation of these bachelor
friends, Levin asked himself: had he in his heart that regret for his
freedom of which they had spoken? He smiled at the question. “Freedom!
What is freedom for? Happiness is only in loving and wishing her
wishes, thinking her thoughts, that is to say, not freedom at
all—that’s happiness!”

“But do I know her ideas, her wishes, her feelings?” some voice
suddenly whispered to him. The smile died away from his face, and he
grew thoughtful. And suddenly a strange feeling came upon him. There
came over him a dread and doubt—doubt of everything.

“What if she does not love me? What if she’s marrying me simply to be
married? What if she doesn’t see herself what she’s doing?” he asked
himself. “She may come to her senses, and only when she is being
married realize that she does not and cannot love me.” And strange,
most evil thoughts of her began to come to him. He was jealous of
Vronsky, as he had been a year ago, as though the evening he had seen
her with Vronsky had been yesterday. He suspected she had not told him
everything.

He jumped up quickly. “No, this can’t go on!” he said to himself in
despair. “I’ll go to her; I’ll ask her; I’ll say for the last time: we
are free, and hadn’t we better stay so? Anything’s better than endless
misery, disgrace, unfaithfulness!” With despair in his heart and bitter
anger against all men, against himself, against her, he went out of the
hotel and drove to her house.

He found her in one of the back rooms. She was sitting on a chest and
making some arrangements with her maid, sorting over heaps of dresses
of different colors, spread on the backs of chairs and on the floor.

“Ah!” she cried, seeing him, and beaming with delight. “Kostya!
Konstantin Dmitrievitch!” (These latter days she used these names
almost alternately.) “I didn’t expect you! I’m going through my
wardrobe to see what’s for whom....”

“Oh! that’s very nice!” he said gloomily, looking at the maid.

“You can go, Dunyasha, I’ll call you presently,” said Kitty. “Kostya,
what’s the matter?” she asked, definitely adopting this familiar name
as soon as the maid had gone out. She noticed his strange face,
agitated and gloomy, and a panic came over her.

“Kitty! I’m in torture. I can’t suffer alone,” he said with despair in
his voice, standing before her and looking imploringly into her eyes.
He saw already from her loving, truthful face, that nothing could come
of what he had meant to say, but yet he wanted her to reassure him
herself. “I’ve come to say that there’s still time. This can all be
stopped and set right.”

“What? I don’t understand. What is the matter?”

“What I have said a thousand times over, and can’t help thinking ...
that I’m not worthy of you. You couldn’t consent to marry me. Think a
little. You’ve made a mistake. Think it over thoroughly. You can’t love
me.... If ... better say so,” he said, not looking at her. “I shall be
wretched. Let people say what they like; anything’s better than
misery.... Far better now while there’s still time....”

“I don’t understand,” she answered, panic-stricken; “you mean you want
to give it up ... don’t want it?”

“Yes, if you don’t love me.”

“You’re out of your mind!” she cried, turning crimson with vexation.
But his face was so piteous, that she restrained her vexation, and
flinging some clothes off an armchair, she sat down beside him. “What
are you thinking? tell me all.”

“I am thinking you can’t love me. What can you love me for?”

“My God! what can I do?...” she said, and burst into tears.

“Oh! what have I done?” he cried, and kneeling before her, he fell to
kissing her hands.

When the princess came into the room five minutes later, she found them
completely reconciled. Kitty had not simply assured him that she loved
him, but had gone so far—in answer to his question, what she loved him
for—as to explain what for. She told him that she loved him because she
understood him completely, because she knew what he would like, and
because everything he liked was good. And this seemed to him perfectly
clear. When the princess came to them, they were sitting side by side
on the chest, sorting the dresses and disputing over Kitty’s wanting to
give Dunyasha the brown dress she had been wearing when Levin proposed
to her, while he insisted that that dress must never be given away, but
Dunyasha must have the blue one.

“How is it you don’t see? She’s a brunette, and it won’t suit her....
I’ve worked it all out.”

Hearing why he had come, the princess was half humorously, half
seriously angry with him, and sent him home to dress and not to hinder
Kitty’s hair-dressing, as Charles the hair-dresser was just coming.

“As it is, she’s been eating nothing lately and is losing her looks,
and then you must come and upset her with your nonsense,” she said to
him. “Get along with you, my dear!”

Levin, guilty and shamefaced, but pacified, went back to his hotel. His
brother, Darya Alexandrovna, and Stepan Arkadyevitch, all in full
dress, were waiting for him to bless him with the holy picture. There
was no time to lose. Darya Alexandrovna had to drive home again to
fetch her curled and pomaded son, who was to carry the holy pictures
after the bride. Then a carriage had to be sent for the best man, and
another that would take Sergey Ivanovitch away would have to be sent
back.... Altogether there were a great many most complicated matters to
be considered and arranged. One thing was unmistakable, that there must
be no delay, as it was already half-past six.

Nothing special happened at the ceremony of benediction with the holy
picture. Stepan Arkadyevitch stood in a comically solemn pose beside
his wife, took the holy picture, and telling Levin to bow down to the
ground, he blessed him with his kindly, ironical smile, and kissed him
three times; Darya Alexandrovna did the same, and immediately was in a
hurry to get off, and again plunged into the intricate question of the
destinations of the various carriages.

“Come, I’ll tell you how we’ll manage: you drive in our carriage to
fetch him, and Sergey Ivanovitch, if he’ll be so good, will drive there
and then send his carriage.”

“Of course; I shall be delighted.”

“We’ll come on directly with him. Are your things sent off?” said
Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“Yes,” answered Levin, and he told Kouzma to put out his clothes for
him to dress.


Chapter 3

A crowd of people, principally women, was thronging round the church
lighted up for the wedding. Those who had not succeeded in getting into
the main entrance were crowding about the windows, pushing, wrangling,
and peeping through the gratings.

More than twenty carriages had already been drawn up in ranks along the
street by the police. A police officer, regardless of the frost, stood
at the entrance, gorgeous in his uniform. More carriages were
continually driving up, and ladies wearing flowers and carrying their
trains, and men taking off their helmets or black hats kept walking
into the church. Inside the church both lusters were already lighted,
and all the candles before the holy pictures. The gilt on the red
ground of the holy picture-stand, and the gilt relief on the pictures,
and the silver of the lusters and candlesticks, and the stones of the
floor, and the rugs, and the banners above in the choir, and the steps
of the altar, and the old blackened books, and the cassocks and
surplices—all were flooded with light. On the right side of the warm
church, in the crowd of frock coats and white ties, uniforms and
broadcloth, velvet, satin, hair and flowers, bare shoulders and arms
and long gloves, there was discreet but lively conversation that echoed
strangely in the high cupola. Every time there was heard the creak of
the opened door the conversation in the crowd died away, and everybody
looked round expecting to see the bride and bridegroom come in. But the
door had opened more than ten times, and each time it was either a
belated guest or guests, who joined the circle of the invited on the
right, or a spectator, who had eluded or softened the police officer,
and went to join the crowd of outsiders on the left. Both the guests
and the outside public had by now passed through all the phases of
anticipation.

At first they imagined that the bride and bridegroom would arrive
immediately, and attached no importance at all to their being late.
Then they began to look more and more often towards the door, and to
talk of whether anything could have happened. Then the long delay began
to be positively discomforting, and relations and guests tried to look
as if they were not thinking of the bridegroom but were engrossed in
conversation.

The head deacon, as though to remind them of the value of his time,
coughed impatiently, making the window-panes quiver in their frames. In
the choir the bored choristers could be heard trying their voices and
blowing their noses. The priest was continually sending first the
beadle and then the deacon to find out whether the bridegroom had not
come, more and more often he went himself, in a lilac vestment and an
embroidered sash, to the side door, expecting to see the bridegroom. At
last one of the ladies, glancing at her watch, said, “It really is
strange, though!” and all the guests became uneasy and began loudly
expressing their wonder and dissatisfaction. One of the bridegroom’s
best men went to find out what had happened. Kitty meanwhile had long
ago been quite ready, and in her white dress and long veil and wreath
of orange blossoms she was standing in the drawing-room of the
Shtcherbatskys’ house with her sister, Madame Lvova, who was her
bridal-mother. She was looking out of the window, and had been for over
half an hour anxiously expecting to hear from the best man that her
bridegroom was at the church.

Levin meanwhile, in his trousers, but without his coat and waistcoat,
was walking to and fro in his room at the hotel, continually putting
his head out of the door and looking up and down the corridor. But in
the corridor there was no sign of the person he was looking for and he
came back in despair, and frantically waving his hands addressed Stepan
Arkadyevitch, who was smoking serenely.

“Was ever a man in such a fearful fool’s position?” he said.

“Yes, it is stupid,” Stepan Arkadyevitch assented, smiling soothingly.
“But don’t worry, it’ll be brought directly.”

“No, what is to be done!” said Levin, with smothered fury. “And these
fools of open waistcoats! Out of the question!” he said, looking at the
crumpled front of his shirt. “And what if the things have been taken on
to the railway station!” he roared in desperation.

“Then you must put on mine.”

“I ought to have done so long ago, if at all.”

“It’s not nice to look ridiculous.... Wait a bit! it will _come
round_.”

The point was that when Levin asked for his evening suit, Kouzma, his
old servant, had brought him the coat, waistcoat, and everything that
was wanted.

“But the shirt!” cried Levin.

“You’ve got a shirt on,” Kouzma answered, with a placid smile.

Kouzma had not thought of leaving out a clean shirt, and on receiving
instructions to pack up everything and send it round to the
Shtcherbatskys’ house, from which the young people were to set out the
same evening, he had done so, packing everything but the dress suit.
The shirt worn since the morning was crumpled and out of the question
with the fashionable open waistcoat. It was a long way to send to the
Shtcherbatskys’. They sent out to buy a shirt. The servant came back;
everything was shut up—it was Sunday. They sent to Stepan
Arkadyevitch’s and brought a shirt—it was impossibly wide and short.
They sent finally to the Shtcherbatskys’ to unpack the things. The
bridegroom was expected at the church while he was pacing up and down
his room like a wild beast in a cage, peeping out into the corridor,
and with horror and despair recalling what absurd things he had said to
Kitty and what she might be thinking now.

At last the guilty Kouzma flew panting into the room with the shirt.

“Only just in time. They were just lifting it into the van,” said
Kouzma.

Three minutes later Levin ran full speed into the corridor, not looking
at his watch for fear of aggravating his sufferings.

“You won’t help matters like this,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with a
smile, hurrying with more deliberation after him. “It will come round,
it will come round ... I tell you.”


Chapter 4

“They’ve come!” “Here he is!” “Which one?” “Rather young, eh?” “Why, my
dear soul, she looks more dead than alive!” were the comments in the
crowd, when Levin, meeting his bride in the entrance, walked with her
into the church.

Stepan Arkadyevitch told his wife the cause of the delay, and the
guests were whispering it with smiles to one another. Levin saw nothing
and no one; he did not take his eyes off his bride.

Everyone said she had lost her looks dreadfully of late, and was not
nearly so pretty on her wedding day as usual; but Levin did not think
so. He looked at her hair done up high, with the long white veil and
white flowers and the high, stand-up, scalloped collar, that in such a
maidenly fashion hid her long neck at the sides and only showed it in
front, her strikingly slender figure, and it seemed to him that she
looked better than ever—not because these flowers, this veil, this gown
from Paris added anything to her beauty; but because, in spite of the
elaborate sumptuousness of her attire, the expression of her sweet
face, of her eyes, of her lips was still her own characteristic
expression of guileless truthfulness.

“I was beginning to think you meant to run away,” she said, and smiled
to him.

“It’s so stupid, what happened to me, I’m ashamed to speak of it!” he
said, reddening, and he was obliged to turn to Sergey Ivanovitch, who
came up to him.

“This is a pretty story of yours about the shirt!” said Sergey
Ivanovitch, shaking his head and smiling.

“Yes, yes!” answered Levin, without an idea of what they were talking
about.

“Now, Kostya, you have to decide,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with an air
of mock dismay, “a weighty question. You are at this moment just in the
humor to appreciate all its gravity. They ask me, are they to light the
candles that have been lighted before or candles that have never been
lighted? It’s a matter of ten roubles,” he added, relaxing his lips
into a smile. “I have decided, but I was afraid you might not agree.”

Levin saw it was a joke, but he could not smile.

“Well, how’s it to be then?—unlighted or lighted candles? that’s the
question.”

“Yes, yes, unlighted.”

“Oh, I’m very glad. The question’s decided!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
smiling. “How silly men are, though, in this position,” he said to
Tchirikov, when Levin, after looking absently at him, had moved back to
his bride.

“Kitty, mind you’re the first to step on the carpet,” said Countess
Nordston, coming up. “You’re a nice person!” she said to Levin.

“Aren’t you frightened, eh?” said Marya Dmitrievna, an old aunt.

“Are you cold? You’re pale. Stop a minute, stoop down,” said Kitty’s
sister, Madame Lvova, and with her plump, handsome arms she smilingly
set straight the flowers on her head.

Dolly came up, tried to say something, but could not speak, cried, and
then laughed unnaturally.

Kitty looked at all of them with the same absent eyes as Levin.

Meanwhile the officiating clergy had got into their vestments, and the
priest and deacon came out to the lectern, which stood in the forepart
of the church. The priest turned to Levin saying something. Levin did
not hear what the priest said.

“Take the bride’s hand and lead her up,” the best man said to Levin.

It was a long while before Levin could make out what was expected of
him. For a long time they tried to set him right and made him begin
again—because he kept taking Kitty by the wrong arm or with the wrong
arm—till he understood at last that what he had to do was, without
changing his position, to take her right hand in his right hand. When
at last he had taken the bride’s hand in the correct way, the priest
walked a few paces in front of them and stopped at the lectern. The
crowd of friends and relations moved after them, with a buzz of talk
and a rustle of skirts. Someone stooped down and pulled out the bride’s
train. The church became so still that the drops of wax could be heard
falling from the candles.

The little old priest in his ecclesiastical cap, with his long
silvery-gray locks of hair parted behind his ears, was fumbling with
something at the lectern, putting out his little old hands from under
the heavy silver vestment with the gold cross on the back of it.

Stepan Arkadyevitch approached him cautiously, whispered something, and
making a sign to Levin, walked back again.

The priest lighted two candles, wreathed with flowers, and holding them
sideways so that the wax dropped slowly from them he turned, facing the
bridal pair. The priest was the same old man that had confessed Levin.
He looked with weary and melancholy eyes at the bride and bridegroom,
sighed, and putting his right hand out from his vestment, blessed the
bridegroom with it, and also with a shade of solicitous tenderness laid
the crossed fingers on the bowed head of Kitty. Then he gave them the
candles, and taking the censer, moved slowly away from them.

“Can it be true?” thought Levin, and he looked round at his bride.
Looking down at her he saw her face in profile, and from the scarcely
perceptible quiver of her lips and eyelashes he knew she was aware of
his eyes upon her. She did not look round, but the high scalloped
collar, that reached her little pink ear, trembled faintly. He saw that
a sigh was held back in her throat, and the little hand in the long
glove shook as it held the candle.

All the fuss of the shirt, of being late, all the talk of friends and
relations, their annoyance, his ludicrous position—all suddenly passed
away and he was filled with joy and dread.

The handsome, stately head-deacon wearing a silver robe and his curly
locks standing out at each side of his head, stepped smartly forward,
and lifting his stole on two fingers, stood opposite the priest.

“Blessed be the name of the Lord,” the solemn syllables rang out slowly
one after another, setting the air quivering with waves of sound.

“Blessed is the name of our God, from the beginning, is now, and ever
shall be,” the little old priest answered in a submissive, piping
voice, still fingering something at the lectern. And the full chorus of
the unseen choir rose up, filling the whole church, from the windows to
the vaulted roof, with broad waves of melody. It grew stronger, rested
for an instant, and slowly died away.

They prayed, as they always do, for peace from on high and for
salvation, for the Holy Synod, and for the Tsar; they prayed, too, for
the servants of God, Konstantin and Ekaterina, now plighting their
troth.

“Vouchsafe to them love made perfect, peace and help, O Lord, we
beseech Thee,” the whole church seemed to breathe with the voice of the
head deacon.

Levin heard the words, and they impressed him. “How did they guess that
it is help, just help that one wants?” he thought, recalling all his
fears and doubts of late. “What do I know? what can I do in this
fearful business,” he thought, “without help? Yes, it is help I want
now.”

When the deacon had finished the prayer for the Imperial family, the
priest turned to the bridal pair with a book: “Eternal God, that
joinest together in love them that were separate,” he read in a gentle,
piping voice: “who hast ordained the union of holy wedlock that cannot
be set asunder, Thou who didst bless Isaac and Rebecca and their
descendants, according to Thy Holy Covenant; bless Thy servants,
Konstantin and Ekaterina, leading them in the path of all good works.
For gracious and merciful art Thou, our Lord, and glory be to Thee, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, now and ever shall be.”

“Amen!” the unseen choir sent rolling again upon the air.

“‘Joinest together in love them that were separate.’ What deep meaning
in those words, and how they correspond with what one feels at this
moment,” thought Levin. “Is she feeling the same as I?”

And looking round, he met her eyes, and from their expression he
concluded that she was understanding it just as he was. But this was a
mistake; she almost completely missed the meaning of the words of the
service; she had not heard them, in fact. She could not listen to them
and take them in, so strong was the one feeling that filled her breast
and grew stronger and stronger. That feeling was joy at the completion
of the process that for the last month and a half had been going on in
her soul, and had during those six weeks been a joy and a torture to
her. On the day when in the drawing-room of the house in Arbaty Street
she had gone up to him in her brown dress, and given herself to him
without a word—on that day, at that hour, there took place in her heart
a complete severance from all her old life, and a quite different, new,
utterly strange life had begun for her, while the old life was actually
going on as before. Those six weeks had for her been a time of the
utmost bliss and the utmost misery. All her life, all her desires and
hopes were concentrated on this one man, still uncomprehended by her,
to whom she was bound by a feeling of alternate attraction and
repulsion, even less comprehended than the man himself, and all the
while she was going on living in the outward conditions of her old
life. Living the old life, she was horrified at herself, at her utter
insurmountable callousness to all her own past, to things, to habits,
to the people she had loved, who loved her—to her mother, who was
wounded by her indifference, to her kind, tender father, till then
dearer than all the world. At one moment she was horrified at this
indifference, at another she rejoiced at what had brought her to this
indifference. She could not frame a thought, not a wish apart from life
with this man; but this new life was not yet, and she could not even
picture it clearly to herself. There was only anticipation, the dread
and joy of the new and the unknown. And now behold—anticipation and
uncertainty and remorse at the abandonment of the old life—all was
ending, and the new was beginning. This new life could not but have
terrors for her inexperience; but, terrible or not, the change had been
wrought six weeks before in her soul, and this was merely the final
sanction of what had long been completed in her heart.

Turning again to the lectern, the priest with some difficulty took
Kitty’s little ring, and asking Levin for his hand, put it on the first
joint of his finger. “The servant of God, Konstantin, plights his troth
to the servant of God, Ekaterina.” And putting his big ring on Kitty’s
touchingly weak, pink little finger, the priest said the same thing.

And the bridal pair tried several times to understand what they had to
do, and each time made some mistake and were corrected by the priest in
a whisper. At last, having duly performed the ceremony, having signed
the rings with the cross, the priest handed Kitty the big ring, and
Levin the little one. Again they were puzzled, and passed the rings
from hand to hand, still without doing what was expected.

Dolly, Tchirikov, and Stepan Arkadyevitch stepped forward to set them
right. There was an interval of hesitation, whispering, and smiles; but
the expression of solemn emotion on the faces of the betrothed pair did
not change: on the contrary, in their perplexity over their hands they
looked more grave and deeply moved than before, and the smile with
which Stepan Arkadyevitch whispered to them that now they would each
put on their own ring died away on his lips. He had a feeling that any
smile would jar on them.

“Thou who didst from the beginning create male and female,” the priest
read after the exchange of rings, “from Thee woman was given to man to
be a helpmeet to him, and for the procreation of children. O Lord, our
God, who hast poured down the blessings of Thy Truth according to Thy
Holy Covenant upon Thy chosen servants, our fathers, from generation to
generation, bless Thy servants Konstantin and Ekaterina, and make their
troth fast in faith, and union of hearts, and truth, and love....”

Levin felt more and more that all his ideas of marriage, all his dreams
of how he would order his life, were mere childishness, and that it was
something he had not understood hitherto, and now understood less than
ever, though it was being performed upon him. The lump in his throat
rose higher and higher, tears that would not be checked came into his
eyes.


Chapter 5

In the church there was all Moscow, all the friends and relations; and
during the ceremony of plighting troth, in the brilliantly lighted
church, there was an incessant flow of discreetly subdued talk in the
circle of gaily dressed women and girls, and men in white ties,
frockcoats, and uniforms. The talk was principally kept up by the men,
while the women were absorbed in watching every detail of the ceremony,
which always means so much to them.

In the little group nearest to the bride were her two sisters: Dolly,
and the other one, the self-possessed beauty, Madame Lvova, who had
just arrived from abroad.

“Why is it Marie’s in lilac, as bad as black, at a wedding?” said
Madame Korsunskaya.

“With her complexion, it’s the one salvation,” responded Madame
Trubetskaya. “I wonder why they had the wedding in the evening? It’s
like shop-people....”

“So much prettier. I was married in the evening too....” answered
Madame Korsunskaya, and she sighed, remembering how charming she had
been that day, and how absurdly in love her husband was, and how
different it all was now.

“They say if anyone’s best man more than ten times, he’ll never be
married. I wanted to be for the tenth time, but the post was taken,”
said Count Siniavin to the pretty Princess Tcharskaya, who had designs
on him.

Princess Tcharskaya only answered with a smile. She looked at Kitty,
thinking how and when she would stand with Count Siniavin in Kitty’s
place, and how she would remind him then of his joke today.

Shtcherbatsky told the old maid of honor, Madame Nikolaeva, that he
meant to put the crown on Kitty’s chignon for luck.

“She ought not to have worn a chignon,” answered Madame Nikolaeva, who
had long ago made up her mind that if the elderly widower she was
angling for married her, the wedding should be of the simplest. “I
don’t like such grandeur.”

Sergey Ivanovitch was talking to Darya Dmitrievna, jestingly assuring
her that the custom of going away after the wedding was becoming common
because newly married people always felt a little ashamed of
themselves.

“Your brother may feel proud of himself. She’s a marvel of sweetness. I
believe you’re envious.”

“Oh, I’ve got over that, Darya Dmitrievna,” he answered, and a
melancholy and serious expression suddenly came over his face.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was telling his sister-in-law his joke about
divorce.

“The wreath wants setting straight,” she answered, not hearing him.

“What a pity she’s lost her looks so,” Countess Nordston said to Madame
Lvova. “Still he’s not worth her little finger, is he?”

“Oh, I like him so—not because he’s my future _beau-frère_,” answered
Madame Lvova. “And how well he’s behaving! It’s so difficult, too, to
look well in such a position, not to be ridiculous. And he’s not
ridiculous, and not affected; one can see he’s moved.”

“You expected it, I suppose?”

“Almost. She always cared for him.”

“Well, we shall see which of them will step on the rug first. I warned
Kitty.”

“It will make no difference,” said Madame Lvova; “we’re all obedient
wives; it’s in our family.”

“Oh, I stepped on the rug before Vassily on purpose. And you, Dolly?”

Dolly stood beside them; she heard them, but she did not answer. She
was deeply moved. The tears stood in her eyes, and she could not have
spoken without crying. She was rejoicing over Kitty and Levin; going
back in thought to her own wedding, she glanced at the radiant figure
of Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgot all the present, and remembered only her
own innocent love. She recalled not herself only, but all her
women-friends and acquaintances. She thought of them on the one day of
their triumph, when they had stood like Kitty under the wedding crown,
with love and hope and dread in their hearts, renouncing the past, and
stepping forward into the mysterious future. Among the brides that came
back to her memory, she thought too of her darling Anna, of whose
proposed divorce she had just been hearing. And she had stood just as
innocent in orange flowers and bridal veil. And now? “It’s terribly
strange,” she said to herself. It was not merely the sisters, the
women-friends and female relations of the bride who were following
every detail of the ceremony. Women who were quite strangers, mere
spectators, were watching it excitedly, holding their breath, in fear
of losing a single movement or expression of the bride and bridegroom,
and angrily not answering, often not hearing, the remarks of the
callous men, who kept making joking or irrelevant observations.

“Why has she been crying? Is she being married against her will?”

“Against her will to a fine fellow like that? A prince, isn’t he?”

“Is that her sister in the white satin? Just listen how the deacon
booms out, ‘And fearing her husband.’”

“Are the choristers from Tchudovo?”

“No, from the Synod.”

“I asked the footman. He says he’s going to take her home to his
country place at once. Awfully rich, they say. That’s why she’s being
married to him.”

“No, they’re a well-matched pair.”

“I say, Marya Vassilievna, you were making out those fly-away
crinolines were not being worn. Just look at her in the puce dress—an
ambassador’s wife they say she is—how her skirt bounces out from side
to side!”

“What a pretty dear the bride is—like a lamb decked with flowers! Well,
say what you will, we women feel for our sister.”

Such were the comments in the crowd of gazing women who had succeeded
in slipping in at the church doors.


Chapter 6

When the ceremony of plighting troth was over, the beadle spread before
the lectern in the middle of the church a piece of pink silken stuff,
the choir sang a complicated and elaborate psalm, in which the bass and
tenor sang responses to one another, and the priest turning round
pointed the bridal pair to the pink silk rug. Though both had often
heard a great deal about the saying that the one who steps first on the
rug will be the head of the house, neither Levin nor Kitty were capable
of recollecting it, as they took the few steps towards it. They did not
hear the loud remarks and disputes that followed, some maintaining he
had stepped on first, and others that both had stepped on together.

After the customary questions, whether they desired to enter upon
matrimony, and whether they were pledged to anyone else, and their
answers, which sounded strange to themselves, a new ceremony began.
Kitty listened to the words of the prayer, trying to make out their
meaning, but she could not. The feeling of triumph and radiant
happiness flooded her soul more and more as the ceremony went on, and
deprived her of all power of attention.

They prayed: “Endow them with continence and fruitfulness, and
vouchsafe that their hearts may rejoice looking upon their sons and
daughters.” They alluded to God’s creation of a wife from Adam’s rib
“and for this cause a man shall leave father and mother, and cleave
unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh,” and that “this is a
great mystery”; they prayed that God would make them fruitful and bless
them, like Isaac and Rebecca, Joseph, Moses and Zipporah, and that they
might look upon their children’s children. “That’s all splendid,”
thought Kitty, catching the words, “all that’s just as it should be,”
and a smile of happiness, unconsciously reflected in everyone who
looked at her, beamed on her radiant face.

“Put it on quite,” voices were heard urging when the priest had put on
the wedding crowns and Shtcherbatsky, his hand shaking in its
three-button glove, held the crown high above her head.

“Put it on!” she whispered, smiling.

Levin looked round at her, and was struck by the joyful radiance on her
face, and unconsciously her feeling infected him. He too, like her felt
glad and happy.

They enjoyed hearing the epistle read, and the roll of the head
deacon’s voice at the last verse, awaited with such impatience by the
outside public. They enjoyed drinking out of the shallow cup of warm
red wine and water, and they were still more pleased when the priest,
flinging back his stole and taking both their hands in his, led them
round the lectern to the accompaniment of bass voices chanting “Glory
to God.”

Shtcherbatsky and Tchirikov, supporting the crowns and stumbling over
the bride’s train, smiling too and seeming delighted at something, were
at one moment left behind, at the next treading on the bridal pair as
the priest came to a halt. The spark of joy kindled in Kitty seemed to
have infected everyone in the church. It seemed to Levin that the
priest and the deacon too wanted to smile just as he did.

Taking the crowns off their heads the priest read the last prayer and
congratulated the young people. Levin looked at Kitty, and he had never
before seen her look as she did. She was charming with the new radiance
of happiness in her face. Levin longed to say something to her, but he
did not know whether it was all over. The priest got him out of his
difficulty. He smiled his kindly smile and said gently, “Kiss your
wife, and you kiss your husband,” and took the candles out of their
hands.

Levin kissed her smiling lips with timid care, gave her his arm, and
with a new strange sense of closeness, walked out of the church. He did
not believe, he could not believe, that it was true. It was only when
their wondering and timid eyes met that he believed in it, because he
felt that they were one.

After supper, the same night, the young people left for the country.


Chapter 7

Vronsky and Anna had been traveling for three months together in
Europe. They had visited Venice, Rome, and Naples, and had just arrived
at a small Italian town where they meant to stay some time. A handsome
head waiter, with thick pomaded hair parted from the neck upwards, an
evening coat, a broad white cambric shirt front, and a bunch of
trinkets hanging above his rounded stomach, stood with his hands in the
full curve of his pockets, looking contemptuously from under his
eyelids while he gave some frigid reply to a gentleman who had stopped
him. Catching the sound of footsteps coming from the other side of the
entry towards the staircase, the head waiter turned round, and seeing
the Russian count, who had taken their best rooms, he took his hands
out of his pockets deferentially, and with a bow informed him that a
courier had been, and that the business about the palazzo had been
arranged. The steward was prepared to sign the agreement.

“Ah! I’m glad to hear it,” said Vronsky. “Is madame at home or not?”

“Madame has been out for a walk but has returned now,” answered the
waiter.

Vronsky took off his soft, wide-brimmed hat and passed his handkerchief
over his heated brow and hair, which had grown half over his ears, and
was brushed back covering the bald patch on his head. And glancing
casually at the gentleman, who still stood there gazing intently at
him, he would have gone on.

“This gentleman is a Russian, and was inquiring after you,” said the
head waiter.

With mingled feelings of annoyance at never being able to get away from
acquaintances anywhere, and longing to find some sort of diversion from
the monotony of his life, Vronsky looked once more at the gentleman,
who had retreated and stood still again, and at the same moment a light
came into the eyes of both.

“Golenishtchev!”

“Vronsky!”

It really was Golenishtchev, a comrade of Vronsky’s in the Corps of
Pages. In the corps Golenishtchev had belonged to the liberal party; he
left the corps without entering the army, and had never taken office
under the government. Vronsky and he had gone completely different ways
on leaving the corps, and had only met once since.

At that meeting Vronsky perceived that Golenishtchev had taken up a
sort of lofty, intellectually liberal line, and was consequently
disposed to look down upon Vronsky’s interests and calling in life.
Hence Vronsky had met him with the chilling and haughty manner he so
well knew how to assume, the meaning of which was: “You may like or
dislike my way of life, that’s a matter of the most perfect
indifference to me; you will have to treat me with respect if you want
to know me.” Golenishtchev had been contemptuously indifferent to the
tone taken by Vronsky. This second meeting might have been expected,
one would have supposed, to estrange them still more. But now they
beamed and exclaimed with delight on recognizing one another. Vronsky
would never have expected to be so pleased to see Golenishtchev, but
probably he was not himself aware how bored he was. He forgot the
disagreeable impression of their last meeting, and with a face of frank
delight held out his hand to his old comrade. The same expression of
delight replaced the look of uneasiness on Golenishtchev’s face.

“How glad I am to meet you!” said Vronsky, showing his strong white
teeth in a friendly smile.

“I heard the name Vronsky, but I didn’t know which one. I’m very, very
glad!”

“Let’s go in. Come, tell me what you’re doing.”

“I’ve been living here for two years. I’m working.”

“Ah!” said Vronsky, with sympathy; “let’s go in.” And with the habit
common with Russians, instead of saying in Russian what he wanted to
keep from the servants, he began to speak in French.

“Do you know Madame Karenina? We are traveling together. I am going to
see her now,” he said in French, carefully scrutinizing Golenishtchev’s
face.

“Ah! I did not know” (though he did know), Golenishtchev answered
carelessly. “Have you been here long?” he added.

“Four days,” Vronsky answered, once more scrutinizing his friend’s face
intently.

“Yes, he’s a decent fellow, and will look at the thing properly,”
Vronsky said to himself, catching the significance of Golenishtchev’s
face and the change of subject. “I can introduce him to Anna, he looks
at it properly.”

During those three months that Vronsky had spent abroad with Anna, he
had always on meeting new people asked himself how the new person would
look at his relations with Anna, and for the most part, in men, he had
met with the “proper” way of looking at it. But if he had been asked,
and those who looked at it “properly” had been asked, exactly how they
did look at it, both he and they would have been greatly puzzled to
answer.

In reality, those who in Vronsky’s opinion had the “proper” view had no
sort of view at all, but behaved in general as well-bred persons do
behave in regard to all the complex and insoluble problems with which
life is encompassed on all sides; they behaved with propriety, avoiding
allusions and unpleasant questions. They assumed an air of fully
comprehending the import and force of the situation, of accepting and
even approving of it, but of considering it superfluous and uncalled
for to put all this into words.

Vronsky at once divined that Golenishtchev was of this class, and
therefore was doubly pleased to see him. And in fact, Golenishtchev’s
manner to Madame Karenina, when he was taken to call on her, was all
that Vronsky could have desired. Obviously without the slightest effort
he steered clear of all subjects which might lead to embarrassment.

He had never met Anna before, and was struck by her beauty, and still
more by the frankness with which she accepted her position. She blushed
when Vronsky brought in Golenishtchev, and he was extremely charmed by
this childish blush overspreading her candid and handsome face. But
what he liked particularly was the way in which at once, as though on
purpose that there might be no misunderstanding with an outsider, she
called Vronsky simply Alexey, and said they were moving into a house
they had just taken, what was here called a palazzo. Golenishtchev
liked this direct and simple attitude to her own position. Looking at
Anna’s manner of simple-hearted, spirited gaiety, and knowing Alexey
Alexandrovitch and Vronsky, Golenishtchev fancied that he understood
her perfectly. He fancied that he understood what she was utterly
unable to understand: how it was that, having made her husband
wretched, having abandoned him and her son and lost her good name, she
yet felt full of spirits, gaiety, and happiness.

“It’s in the guide-book,” said Golenishtchev, referring to the palazzo
Vronsky had taken. “There’s a first-rate Tintoretto there. One of his
latest period.”

“I tell you what: it’s a lovely day, let’s go and have another look at
it,” said Vronsky, addressing Anna.

“I shall be very glad to; I’ll go and put on my hat. Would you say it’s
hot?” she said, stopping short in the doorway and looking inquiringly
at Vronsky. And again a vivid flush overspread her face.

Vronsky saw from her eyes that she did not know on what terms he cared
to be with Golenishtchev, and so was afraid of not behaving as he would
wish.

He looked a long, tender look at her.

“No, not very,” he said.

And it seemed to her that she understood everything, most of all, that
he was pleased with her; and smiling to him, she walked with her rapid
step out at the door.

The friends glanced at one another, and a look of hesitation came into
both faces, as though Golenishtchev, unmistakably admiring her, would
have liked to say something about her, and could not find the right
thing to say, while Vronsky desired and dreaded his doing so.

“Well then,” Vronsky began to start a conversation of some sort; “so
you’re settled here? You’re still at the same work, then?” he went on,
recalling that he had been told Golenishtchev was writing something.

“Yes, I’m writing the second part of the _Two Elements_,” said
Golenishtchev, coloring with pleasure at the question—“that is, to be
exact, I am not writing it yet; I am preparing, collecting materials.
It will be of far wider scope, and will touch on almost all questions.
We in Russia refuse to see that we are the heirs of Byzantium,” and he
launched into a long and heated explanation of his views.

Vronsky at the first moment felt embarrassed at not even knowing of the
first part of the _Two Elements_, of which the author spoke as
something well known. But as Golenishtchev began to lay down his
opinions and Vronsky was able to follow them even without knowing the
_Two Elements_, he listened to him with some interest, for
Golenishtchev spoke well. But Vronsky was startled and annoyed by the
nervous irascibility with which Golenishtchev talked of the subject
that engrossed him. As he went on talking, his eyes glittered more and
more angrily; he was more and more hurried in his replies to imaginary
opponents, and his face grew more and more excited and worried.
Remembering Golenishtchev, a thin, lively, good-natured and well-bred
boy, always at the head of the class, Vronsky could not make out the
reason of his irritability, and he did not like it. What he
particularly disliked was that Golenishtchev, a man belonging to a good
set, should put himself on a level with some scribbling fellows, with
whom he was irritated and angry. Was it worth it? Vronsky disliked it,
yet he felt that Golenishtchev was unhappy, and was sorry for him.
Unhappiness, almost mental derangement, was visible on his mobile,
rather handsome face, while without even noticing Anna’s coming in, he
went on hurriedly and hotly expressing his views.

When Anna came in in her hat and cape, and her lovely hand rapidly
swinging her parasol, and stood beside him, it was with a feeling of
relief that Vronsky broke away from the plaintive eyes of Golenishtchev
which fastened persistently upon him, and with a fresh rush of love
looked at his charming companion, full of life and happiness.
Golenishtchev recovered himself with an effort, and at first was
dejected and gloomy, but Anna, disposed to feel friendly with everyone
as she was at that time, soon revived his spirits by her direct and
lively manner. After trying various subjects of conversation, she got
him upon painting, of which he talked very well, and she listened to
him attentively. They walked to the house they had taken, and looked
over it.

“I am very glad of one thing,” said Anna to Golenishtchev when they
were on their way back, “Alexey will have a capital _atelier_. You must
certainly take that room,” she said to Vronsky in Russian, using the
affectionately familiar form as though she saw that Golenishtchev would
become intimate with them in their isolation, and that there was no
need of reserve before him.

“Do you paint?” said Golenishtchev, turning round quickly to Vronsky.

“Yes, I used to study long ago, and now I have begun to do a little,”
said Vronsky, reddening.

“He has great talent,” said Anna with a delighted smile. “I’m no judge,
of course. But good judges have said the same.”


Chapter 8

Anna, in that first period of her emancipation and rapid return to
health, felt herself unpardonably happy and full of the joy of life.
The thought of her husband’s unhappiness did not poison her happiness.
On one side that memory was too awful to be thought of. On the other
side her husband’s unhappiness had given her too much happiness to be
regretted. The memory of all that had happened after her illness: her
reconciliation with her husband, its breakdown, the news of Vronsky’s
wound, his visit, the preparations for divorce, the departure from her
husband’s house, the parting from her son—all that seemed to her like a
delirious dream, from which she had waked up alone with Vronsky abroad.
The thought of the harm caused to her husband aroused in her a feeling
like repulsion, and akin to what a drowning man might feel who has
shaken off another man clinging to him. That man did drown. It was an
evil action, of course, but it was the sole means of escape, and better
not to brood over these fearful facts.

One consolatory reflection upon her conduct had occurred to her at the
first moment of the final rupture, and when now she recalled all the
past, she remembered that one reflection. “I have inevitably made that
man wretched,” she thought; “but I don’t want to profit by his misery.
I too am suffering, and shall suffer; I am losing what I prized above
everything—I am losing my good name and my son. I have done wrong, and
so I don’t want happiness, I don’t want a divorce, and shall suffer
from my shame and the separation from my child.” But, however sincerely
Anna had meant to suffer, she was not suffering. Shame there was not.
With the tact of which both had such a large share, they had succeeded
in avoiding Russian ladies abroad, and so had never placed themselves
in a false position, and everywhere they had met people who pretended
that they perfectly understood their position, far better indeed than
they did themselves. Separation from the son she loved—even that did
not cause her anguish in these early days. The baby girl—_his_
child—was so sweet, and had so won Anna’s heart, since she was all that
was left her, that Anna rarely thought of her son.

The desire for life, waxing stronger with recovered health, was so
intense, and the conditions of life were so new and pleasant, that Anna
felt unpardonably happy. The more she got to know Vronsky, the more she
loved him. She loved him for himself, and for his love for her. Her
complete ownership of him was a continual joy to her. His presence was
always sweet to her. All the traits of his character, which she learned
to know better and better, were unutterably dear to her. His
appearance, changed by his civilian dress, was as fascinating to her as
though she were some young girl in love. In everything he said,
thought, and did, she saw something particularly noble and elevated.
Her adoration of him alarmed her indeed; she sought and could not find
in him anything not fine. She dared not show him her sense of her own
insignificance beside him. It seemed to her that, knowing this, he
might sooner cease to love her; and she dreaded nothing now so much as
losing his love, though she had no grounds for fearing it. But she
could not help being grateful to him for his attitude to her, and
showing that she appreciated it. He, who had in her opinion such a
marked aptitude for a political career, in which he would have been
certain to play a leading part—he had sacrificed his ambition for her
sake, and never betrayed the slightest regret. He was more lovingly
respectful to her than ever, and the constant care that she should not
feel the awkwardness of her position never deserted him for a single
instant. He, so manly a man, never opposed her, had indeed, with her,
no will of his own, and was anxious, it seemed, for nothing but to
anticipate her wishes. And she could not but appreciate this, even
though the very intensity of his solicitude for her, the atmosphere of
care with which he surrounded her, sometimes weighed upon her.

Vronsky, meanwhile, in spite of the complete realization of what he had
so long desired, was not perfectly happy. He soon felt that the
realization of his desires gave him no more than a grain of sand out of
the mountain of happiness he had expected. It showed him the mistake
men make in picturing to themselves happiness as the realization of
their desires. For a time after joining his life to hers, and putting
on civilian dress, he had felt all the delight of freedom in general of
which he had known nothing before, and of freedom in his love,—and he
was content, but not for long. He was soon aware that there was
springing up in his heart a desire for desires—_ennui_. Without
conscious intention he began to clutch at every passing caprice, taking
it for a desire and an object. Sixteen hours of the day must be
occupied in some way, since they were living abroad in complete
freedom, outside the conditions of social life which filled up time in
Petersburg. As for the amusements of bachelor existence, which had
provided Vronsky with entertainment on previous tours abroad, they
could not be thought of, since the sole attempt of the sort had led to
a sudden attack of depression in Anna, quite out of proportion with the
cause—a late supper with bachelor friends. Relations with the society
of the place—foreign and Russian—were equally out of the question owing
to the irregularity of their position. The inspection of objects of
interest, apart from the fact that everything had been seen already,
had not for Vronsky, a Russian and a sensible man, the immense
significance Englishmen are able to attach to that pursuit.

And just as the hungry stomach eagerly accepts every object it can get,
hoping to find nourishment in it, Vronsky quite unconsciously clutched
first at politics, then at new books, and then at pictures.

As he had from a child a taste for painting, and as, not knowing what
to spend his money on, he had begun collecting engravings, he came to a
stop at painting, began to take interest in it, and concentrated upon
it the unoccupied mass of desires which demanded satisfaction.

He had a ready appreciation of art, and probably, with a taste for
imitating art, he supposed himself to have the real thing essential for
an artist, and after hesitating for some time which style of painting
to select—religious, historical, realistic, or genre painting—he set to
work to paint. He appreciated all kinds, and could have felt inspired
by anyone of them; but he had no conception of the possibility of
knowing nothing at all of any school of painting, and of being inspired
directly by what is within the soul, without caring whether what is
painted will belong to any recognized school. Since he knew nothing of
this, and drew his inspiration, not directly from life, but indirectly
from life embodied in art, his inspiration came very quickly and
easily, and as quickly and easily came his success in painting
something very similar to the sort of painting he was trying to
imitate.

More than any other style he liked the French—graceful and
effective—and in that style he began to paint Anna’s portrait in
Italian costume, and the portrait seemed to him, and to everyone who
saw it, extremely successful.


Chapter 9

The old neglected palazzo, with its lofty carved ceilings and frescoes
on the walls, with its floors of mosaic, with its heavy yellow stuff
curtains on the windows, with its vases on pedestals, and its open
fireplaces, its carved doors and gloomy reception rooms, hung with
pictures—this palazzo did much, by its very appearance after they had
moved into it, to confirm in Vronsky the agreeable illusion that he was
not so much a Russian country gentleman, a retired army officer, as an
enlightened amateur and patron of the arts, himself a modest artist who
had renounced the world, his connections, and his ambition for the sake
of the woman he loved.

The pose chosen by Vronsky with their removal into the palazzo was
completely successful, and having, through Golenishtchev, made
acquaintance with a few interesting people, for a time he was
satisfied. He painted studies from nature under the guidance of an
Italian professor of painting, and studied mediæval Italian life.
Mediæval Italian life so fascinated Vronsky that he even wore a hat and
flung a cloak over his shoulder in the mediæval style, which, indeed,
was extremely becoming to him.

“Here we live, and know nothing of what’s going on,” Vronsky said to
Golenishtchev as he came to see him one morning. “Have you seen
Mihailov’s picture?” he said, handing him a Russian gazette he had
received that morning, and pointing to an article on a Russian artist,
living in the very same town, and just finishing a picture which had
long been talked about, and had been bought beforehand. The article
reproached the government and the academy for letting so remarkable an
artist be left without encouragement and support.

“I’ve seen it,” answered Golenishtchev. “Of course, he’s not without
talent, but it’s all in a wrong direction. It’s all the
Ivanov-Strauss-Renan attitude to Christ and to religious painting.”

“What is the subject of the picture?” asked Anna.

“Christ before Pilate. Christ is represented as a Jew with all the
realism of the new school.”

And the question of the subject of the picture having brought him to
one of his favorite theories, Golenishtchev launched forth into a
disquisition on it.

“I can’t understand how they can fall into such a gross mistake. Christ
always has His definite embodiment in the art of the great masters. And
therefore, if they want to depict, not God, but a revolutionist or a
sage, let them take from history a Socrates, a Franklin, a Charlotte
Corday, but not Christ. They take the very figure which cannot be taken
for their art, and then....”

“And is it true that this Mihailov is in such poverty?” asked Vronsky,
thinking that, as a Russian Mæcenas, it was his duty to assist the
artist regardless of whether the picture were good or bad.

“I should say not. He’s a remarkable portrait-painter. Have you ever
seen his portrait of Madame Vassiltchikova? But I believe he doesn’t
care about painting any more portraits, and so very likely he is in
want. I maintain that....”

“Couldn’t we ask him to paint a portrait of Anna Arkadyevna?” said
Vronsky.

“Why mine?” said Anna. “After yours I don’t want another portrait.
Better have one of Annie” (so she called her baby girl). “Here she is,”
she added, looking out of the window at the handsome Italian nurse, who
was carrying the child out into the garden, and immediately glancing
unnoticed at Vronsky. The handsome nurse, from whom Vronsky was
painting a head for his picture, was the one hidden grief in Anna’s
life. He painted with her as his model, admired her beauty and
mediævalism, and Anna dared not confess to herself that she was afraid
of becoming jealous of this nurse, and was for that reason particularly
gracious and condescending both to her and her little son. Vronsky,
too, glanced out of the window and into Anna’s eyes, and, turning at
once to Golenishtchev, he said:

“Do you know this Mihailov?”

“I have met him. But he’s a queer fish, and quite without breeding. You
know, one of those uncouth new people one’s so often coming across
nowadays, one of those free-thinkers you know, who are reared
_d’emblée_ in theories of atheism, scepticism, and materialism. In
former days,” said Golenishtchev, not observing, or not willing to
observe, that both Anna and Vronsky wanted to speak, “in former days
the free-thinker was a man who had been brought up in ideas of
religion, law, and morality, and only through conflict and struggle
came to free-thought; but now there has sprung up a new type of born
free-thinkers who grow up without even having heard of principles of
morality or of religion, of the existence of authorities, who grow up
directly in ideas of negation in everything, that is to say, savages.
Well, he’s of that class. He’s the son, it appears, of some Moscow
butler, and has never had any sort of bringing-up. When he got into the
academy and made his reputation he tried, as he’s no fool, to educate
himself. And he turned to what seemed to him the very source of
culture—the magazines. In old times, you see, a man who wanted to
educate himself—a Frenchman, for instance—would have set to work to
study all the classics and theologians and tragedians and historians
and philosophers, and, you know, all the intellectual work that came in
his way. But in our day he goes straight for the literature of
negation, very quickly assimilates all the extracts of the science of
negation, and he’s ready. And that’s not all—twenty years ago he would
have found in that literature traces of conflict with authorities, with
the creeds of the ages; he would have perceived from this conflict that
there was something else; but now he comes at once upon a literature in
which the old creeds do not even furnish matter for discussion, but it
is stated baldly that there is nothing else—evolution, natural
selection, struggle for existence—and that’s all. In my article
I’ve....”

“I tell you what,” said Anna, who had for a long while been exchanging
wary glances with Vronsky, and knew that he was not in the least
interested in the education of this artist, but was simply absorbed by
the idea of assisting him, and ordering a portrait of him; “I tell you
what,” she said, resolutely interrupting Golenishtchev, who was still
talking away, “let’s go and see him!”

Golenishtchev recovered his self-possession and readily agreed. But as
the artist lived in a remote suburb, it was decided to take the
carriage.

An hour later Anna, with Golenishtchev by her side and Vronsky on the
front seat of the carriage, facing them, drove up to a new ugly house
in the remote suburb. On learning from the porter’s wife, who came out
to them, that Mihailov saw visitors at his studio, but that at that
moment he was in his lodging only a couple of steps off, they sent her
to him with their cards, asking permission to see his picture.


Chapter 10

The artist Mihailov was, as always, at work when the cards of Count
Vronsky and Golenishtchev were brought to him. In the morning he had
been working in his studio at his big picture. On getting home he flew
into a rage with his wife for not having managed to put off the
landlady, who had been asking for money.

“I’ve said it to you twenty times, don’t enter into details. You’re
fool enough at all times, and when you start explaining things in
Italian you’re a fool three times as foolish,” he said after a long
dispute.

“Don’t let it run so long; it’s not my fault. If I had the money....”

“Leave me in peace, for God’s sake!” Mihailov shrieked, with tears in
his voice, and, stopping his ears, he went off into his working room,
the other side of a partition wall, and closed the door after him.
“Idiotic woman!” he said to himself, sat down to the table, and,
opening a portfolio, he set to work at once with peculiar fervor at a
sketch he had begun.

Never did he work with such fervor and success as when things went ill
with him, and especially when he quarreled with his wife. “Oh! damn
them all!” he thought as he went on working. He was making a sketch for
the figure of a man in a violent rage. A sketch had been made before,
but he was dissatisfied with it. “No, that one was better ... where is
it?” He went back to his wife, and scowling, and not looking at her,
asked his eldest little girl, where was that piece of paper he had
given them? The paper with the discarded sketch on it was found, but it
was dirty, and spotted with candle-grease. Still, he took the sketch,
laid it on his table, and, moving a little away, screwing up his eyes,
he fell to gazing at it. All at once he smiled and gesticulated
gleefully.

“That’s it! that’s it!” he said, and, at once picking up the pencil, he
began rapidly drawing. The spot of tallow had given the man a new pose.

He had sketched this new pose, when all at once he recalled the face of
a shopkeeper of whom he had bought cigars, a vigorous face with a
prominent chin, and he sketched this very face, this chin on to the
figure of the man. He laughed aloud with delight. The figure from a
lifeless imagined thing had become living, and such that it could never
be changed. That figure lived, and was clearly and unmistakably
defined. The sketch might be corrected in accordance with the
requirements of the figure, the legs, indeed, could and must be put
differently, and the position of the left hand must be quite altered;
the hair too might be thrown back. But in making these corrections he
was not altering the figure but simply getting rid of what concealed
the figure. He was, as it were, stripping off the wrappings which
hindered it from being distinctly seen. Each new feature only brought
out the whole figure in all its force and vigor, as it had suddenly
come to him from the spot of tallow. He was carefully finishing the
figure when the cards were brought him.

“Coming, coming!”

He went in to his wife.

“Come, Sasha, don’t be cross!” he said, smiling timidly and
affectionately at her. “You were to blame. I was to blame. I’ll make it
all right.” And having made peace with his wife he put on an
olive-green overcoat with a velvet collar and a hat, and went towards
his studio. The successful figure he had already forgotten. Now he was
delighted and excited at the visit of these people of consequence,
Russians, who had come in their carriage.

Of his picture, the one that stood now on his easel, he had at the
bottom of his heart one conviction—that no one had ever painted a
picture like it. He did not believe that his picture was better than
all the pictures of Raphael, but he knew that what he tried to convey
in that picture, no one ever had conveyed. This he knew positively, and
had known a long while, ever since he had begun to paint it. But other
people’s criticisms, whatever they might be, had yet immense
consequence in his eyes, and they agitated him to the depths of his
soul. Any remark, the most insignificant, that showed that the critic
saw even the tiniest part of what he saw in the picture, agitated him
to the depths of his soul. He always attributed to his critics a more
profound comprehension than he had himself, and always expected from
them something he did not himself see in the picture. And often in
their criticisms he fancied that he had found this.

He walked rapidly to the door of his studio, and in spite of his
excitement he was struck by the soft light on Anna’s figure as she
stood in the shade of the entrance listening to Golenishtchev, who was
eagerly telling her something, while she evidently wanted to look round
at the artist. He was himself unconscious how, as he approached them,
he seized on this impression and absorbed it, as he had the chin of the
shopkeeper who had sold him the cigars, and put it away somewhere to be
brought out when he wanted it. The visitors, not agreeably impressed
beforehand by Golenishtchev’s account of the artist, were still less so
by his personal appearance. Thick-set and of middle height, with nimble
movements, with his brown hat, olive-green coat and narrow
trousers—though wide trousers had been a long while in fashion,—most of
all, with the ordinariness of his broad face, and the combined
expression of timidity and anxiety to keep up his dignity, Mihailov
made an unpleasant impression.

“Please step in,” he said, trying to look indifferent, and going into
the passage he took a key out of his pocket and opened the door.


Chapter 11

On entering the studio, Mihailov once more scanned his visitors and
noted down in his imagination Vronsky’s expression too, and especially
his jaws. Although his artistic sense was unceasingly at work
collecting materials, although he felt a continually increasing
excitement as the moment of criticizing his work drew nearer, he
rapidly and subtly formed, from imperceptible signs, a mental image of
these three persons.

That fellow (Golenishtchev) was a Russian living here. Mihailov did not
remember his surname nor where he had met him, nor what he had said to
him. He only remembered his face as he remembered all the faces he had
ever seen; but he remembered, too, that it was one of the faces laid by
in his memory in the immense class of the falsely consequential and
poor in expression. The abundant hair and very open forehead gave an
appearance of consequence to the face, which had only one expression—a
petty, childish, peevish expression, concentrated just above the bridge
of the narrow nose. Vronsky and Madame Karenina must be, Mihailov
supposed, distinguished and wealthy Russians, knowing nothing about
art, like all those wealthy Russians, but posing as amateurs and
connoisseurs. “Most likely they’ve already looked at all the antiques,
and now they’re making the round of the studios of the new people, the
German humbug, and the cracked Pre-Raphaelite English fellow, and have
only come to me to make the point of view complete,” he thought. He was
well acquainted with the way dilettanti have (the cleverer they were
the worse he found them) of looking at the works of contemporary
artists with the sole object of being in a position to say that art is
a thing of the past, and that the more one sees of the new men the more
one sees how inimitable the works of the great old masters have
remained. He expected all this; he saw it all in their faces, he saw it
in the careless indifference with which they talked among themselves,
stared at the lay figures and busts, and walked about in leisurely
fashion, waiting for him to uncover his picture. But in spite of this,
while he was turning over his studies, pulling up the blinds and taking
off the sheet, he was in intense excitement, especially as, in spite of
his conviction that all distinguished and wealthy Russians were certain
to be beasts and fools, he liked Vronsky, and still more Anna.

“Here, if you please,” he said, moving on one side with his nimble gait
and pointing to his picture, “it’s the exhortation to Pilate. Matthew,
chapter xxvii,” he said, feeling his lips were beginning to tremble
with emotion. He moved away and stood behind them.

For the few seconds during which the visitors were gazing at the
picture in silence Mihailov too gazed at it with the indifferent eye of
an outsider. For those few seconds he was sure in anticipation that a
higher, juster criticism would be uttered by them, by those very
visitors whom he had been so despising a moment before. He forgot all
he had thought about his picture before during the three years he had
been painting it; he forgot all its qualities which had been absolutely
certain to him—he saw the picture with their indifferent, new, outside
eyes, and saw nothing good in it. He saw in the foreground Pilate’s
irritated face and the serene face of Christ, and in the background the
figures of Pilate’s retinue and the face of John watching what was
happening. Every face that, with such agony, such blunders and
corrections had grown up within him with its special character, every
face that had given him such torments and such raptures, and all these
faces so many times transposed for the sake of the harmony of the
whole, all the shades of color and tones that he had attained with such
labor—all of this together seemed to him now, looking at it with their
eyes, the merest vulgarity, something that had been done a thousand
times over. The face dearest to him, the face of Christ, the center of
the picture, which had given him such ecstasy as it unfolded itself to
him, was utterly lost to him when he glanced at the picture with their
eyes. He saw a well-painted (no, not even that—he distinctly saw now a
mass of defects) repetition of those endless Christs of Titian,
Raphael, Rubens, and the same soldiers and Pilate. It was all common,
poor, and stale, and positively badly painted—weak and unequal. They
would be justified in repeating hypocritically civil speeches in the
presence of the painter, and pitying him and laughing at him when they
were alone again.

The silence (though it lasted no more than a minute) became too
intolerable to him. To break it, and to show he was not agitated, he
made an effort and addressed Golenishtchev.

“I think I’ve had the pleasure of meeting you,” he said, looking
uneasily first at Anna, then at Vronsky, in fear of losing any shade of
their expression.

“To be sure! We met at Rossi’s, do you remember, at that _soirée_ when
that Italian lady recited—the new Rachel?” Golenishtchev answered
easily, removing his eyes without the slightest regret from the picture
and turning to the artist.

Noticing, however, that Mihailov was expecting a criticism of the
picture, he said:

“Your picture has got on a great deal since I saw it last time; and
what strikes me particularly now, as it did then, is the figure of
Pilate. One so knows the man: a good-natured, capital fellow, but an
official through and through, who does not know what it is he’s doing.
But I fancy....”

All Mihailov’s mobile face beamed at once; his eyes sparkled. He tried
to say something, but he could not speak for excitement, and pretended
to be coughing. Low as was his opinion of Golenishtchev’s capacity for
understanding art, trifling as was the true remark upon the fidelity of
the expression of Pilate as an official, and offensive as might have
seemed the utterance of so unimportant an observation while nothing was
said of more serious points, Mihailov was in an ecstasy of delight at
this observation. He had himself thought about Pilate’s figure just
what Golenishtchev said. The fact that this reflection was but one of
millions of reflections, which as Mihailov knew for certain would be
true, did not diminish for him the significance of Golenishtchev’s
remark. His heart warmed to Golenishtchev for this remark, and from a
state of depression he suddenly passed to ecstasy. At once the whole of
his picture lived before him in all the indescribable complexity of
everything living. Mihailov again tried to say that that was how he
understood Pilate, but his lips quivered intractably, and he could not
pronounce the words. Vronsky and Anna too said something in that
subdued voice in which, partly to avoid hurting the artist’s feelings
and partly to avoid saying out loud something silly—so easily said when
talking of art—people usually speak at exhibitions of pictures.
Mihailov fancied that the picture had made an impression on them too.
He went up to them.

“How marvelous Christ’s expression is!” said Anna. Of all she saw she
liked that expression most of all, and she felt that it was the center
of the picture, and so praise of it would be pleasant to the artist.
“One can see that He is pitying Pilate.”

This again was one of the million true reflections that could be found
in his picture and in the figure of Christ. She said that He was
pitying Pilate. In Christ’s expression there ought to be indeed an
expression of pity, since there is an expression of love, of heavenly
peace, of readiness for death, and a sense of the vanity of words. Of
course there is the expression of an official in Pilate and of pity in
Christ, seeing that one is the incarnation of the fleshly and the other
of the spiritual life. All this and much more flashed into Mihailov’s
thoughts.

“Yes, and how that figure is done—what atmosphere! One can walk round
it,” said Golenishtchev, unmistakably betraying by this remark that he
did not approve of the meaning and idea of the figure.

“Yes, there’s a wonderful mastery!” said Vronsky. “How those figures in
the background stand out! There you have technique,” he said,
addressing Golenishtchev, alluding to a conversation between them about
Vronsky’s despair of attaining this technique.

“Yes, yes, marvelous!” Golenishtchev and Anna assented. In spite of the
excited condition in which he was, the sentence about technique had
sent a pang to Mihailov’s heart, and looking angrily at Vronsky he
suddenly scowled. He had often heard this word technique, and was
utterly unable to understand what was understood by it. He knew that by
this term was understood a mechanical facility for painting or drawing,
entirely apart from its subject. He had noticed often that even in
actual praise technique was opposed to essential quality, as though one
could paint well something that was bad. He knew that a great deal of
attention and care was necessary in taking off the coverings, to avoid
injuring the creation itself, and to take off all the coverings; but
there was no art of painting—no technique of any sort—about it. If to a
little child or to his cook were revealed what he saw, it or she would
have been able to peel the wrappings off what was seen. And the most
experienced and adroit painter could not by mere mechanical facility
paint anything if the lines of the subject were not revealed to him
first. Besides, he saw that if it came to talking about technique, it
was impossible to praise him for it. In all he had painted and
repainted he saw faults that hurt his eyes, coming from want of care in
taking off the wrappings—faults he could not correct now without
spoiling the whole. And in almost all the figures and faces he saw,
too, remnants of the wrappings not perfectly removed that spoiled the
picture.

“One thing might be said, if you will allow me to make the remark....”
observed Golenishtchev.

“Oh, I shall be delighted, I beg you,” said Mihailov with a forced
smile.

“That is, that you make Him the man-god, and not the God-man. But I
know that was what you meant to do.”

“I cannot paint a Christ that is not in my heart,” said Mihailov
gloomily.

“Yes; but in that case, if you will allow me to say what I think....
Your picture is so fine that my observation cannot detract from it,
and, besides, it is only my personal opinion. With you it is different.
Your very motive is different. But let us take Ivanov. I imagine that
if Christ is brought down to the level of an historical character, it
would have been better for Ivanov to select some other historical
subject, fresh, untouched.”

“But if this is the greatest subject presented to art?”

“If one looked one would find others. But the point is that art cannot
suffer doubt and discussion. And before the picture of Ivanov the
question arises for the believer and the unbeliever alike, ‘Is it God,
or is it not God?’ and the unity of the impression is destroyed.”

“Why so? I think that for educated people,” said Mihailov, “the
question cannot exist.”

Golenishtchev did not agree with this, and confounded Mihailov by his
support of his first idea of the unity of the impression being
essential to art.

Mihailov was greatly perturbed, but he could say nothing in defense of
his own idea.


Chapter 12

Anna and Vronsky had long been exchanging glances, regretting their
friend’s flow of cleverness. At last Vronsky, without waiting for the
artist, walked away to another small picture.

“Oh, how exquisite! What a lovely thing! A gem! How exquisite!” they
cried with one voice.

“What is it they’re so pleased with?” thought Mihailov. He had
positively forgotten that picture he had painted three years ago. He
had forgotten all the agonies and the ecstasies he had lived through
with that picture when for several months it had been the one thought
haunting him day and night. He had forgotten, as he always forgot, the
pictures he had finished. He did not even like to look at it, and had
only brought it out because he was expecting an Englishman who wanted
to buy it.

“Oh, that’s only an old study,” he said.

“How fine!” said Golenishtchev, he too, with unmistakable sincerity,
falling under the spell of the picture.

Two boys were angling in the shade of a willow-tree. The elder had just
dropped in the hook, and was carefully pulling the float from behind a
bush, entirely absorbed in what he was doing. The other, a little
younger, was lying in the grass leaning on his elbows, with his
tangled, flaxen head in his hands, staring at the water with his dreamy
blue eyes. What was he thinking of?

The enthusiasm over this picture stirred some of the old feeling for it
in Mihailov, but he feared and disliked this waste of feeling for
things past, and so, even though this praise was grateful to him, he
tried to draw his visitors away to a third picture.

But Vronsky asked whether the picture was for sale. To Mihailov at that
moment, excited by visitors, it was extremely distasteful to speak of
money matters.

“It is put up there to be sold,” he answered, scowling gloomily.

When the visitors had gone, Mihailov sat down opposite the picture of
Pilate and Christ, and in his mind went over what had been said, and
what, though not said, had been implied by those visitors. And, strange
to say, what had had such weight with him, while they were there and
while he mentally put himself at their point of view, suddenly lost all
importance for him. He began to look at his picture with all his own
full artist vision, and was soon in that mood of conviction of the
perfectibility, and so of the significance, of his picture—a conviction
essential to the most intense fervor, excluding all other interests—in
which alone he could work.

Christ’s foreshortened leg was not right, though. He took his palette
and began to work. As he corrected the leg he looked continually at the
figure of John in the background, which his visitors had not even
noticed, but which he knew was beyond perfection. When he had finished
the leg he wanted to touch that figure, but he felt too much excited
for it. He was equally unable to work when he was cold and when he was
too much affected and saw everything too much. There was only one stage
in the transition from coldness to inspiration, at which work was
possible. Today he was too much agitated. He would have covered the
picture, but he stopped, holding the cloth in his hand, and, smiling
blissfully, gazed a long while at the figure of John. At last, as it
were regretfully tearing himself away, he dropped the cloth, and,
exhausted but happy, went home.

Vronsky, Anna, and Golenishtchev, on their way home, were particularly
lively and cheerful. They talked of Mihailov and his pictures. The word
_talent_, by which they meant an inborn, almost physical, aptitude
apart from brain and heart, and in which they tried to find an
expression for all the artist had gained from life, recurred
particularly often in their talk, as though it were necessary for them
to sum up what they had no conception of, though they wanted to talk of
it. They said that there was no denying his talent, but that his talent
could not develop for want of education—the common defect of our
Russian artists. But the picture of the boys had imprinted itself on
their memories, and they were continually coming back to it. “What an
exquisite thing! How he has succeeded in it, and how simply! He doesn’t
even comprehend how good it is. Yes, I mustn’t let it slip; I must buy
it,” said Vronsky.


Chapter 13

Mihailov sold Vronsky his picture, and agreed to paint a portrait of
Anna. On the day fixed he came and began the work.

From the fifth sitting the portrait impressed everyone, especially
Vronsky, not only by its resemblance, but by its characteristic beauty.
It was strange how Mihailov could have discovered just her
characteristic beauty. “One needs to know and love her as I have loved
her to discover the very sweetest expression of her soul,” Vronsky
thought, though it was only from this portrait that he had himself
learned this sweetest expression of her soul. But the expression was so
true that he, and others too, fancied they had long known it.

“I have been struggling on for ever so long without doing anything,” he
said of his own portrait of her, “and he just looked and painted it.
That’s where technique comes in.”

“That will come,” was the consoling reassurance given him by
Golenishtchev, in whose view Vronsky had both talent, and what was most
important, culture, giving him a wider outlook on art. Golenishtchev’s
faith in Vronsky’s talent was propped up by his own need of Vronsky’s
sympathy and approval for his own articles and ideas, and he felt that
the praise and support must be mutual.

In another man’s house, and especially in Vronsky’s palazzo, Mihailov
was quite a different man from what he was in his studio. He behaved
with hostile courtesy, as though he were afraid of coming closer to
people he did not respect. He called Vronsky “your excellency,” and
notwithstanding Anna’s and Vronsky’s invitations, he would never stay
to dinner, nor come except for the sittings. Anna was even more
friendly to him than to other people, and was very grateful for her
portrait. Vronsky was more than cordial with him, and was obviously
interested to know the artist’s opinion of his picture. Golenishtchev
never let slip an opportunity of instilling sound ideas about art into
Mihailov. But Mihailov remained equally chilly to all of them. Anna was
aware from his eyes that he liked looking at her, but he avoided
conversation with her. Vronsky’s talk about his painting he met with
stubborn silence, and he was as stubbornly silent when he was shown
Vronsky’s picture. He was unmistakably bored by Golenishtchev’s
conversation, and he did not attempt to oppose him.

Altogether Mihailov, with his reserved and disagreeable, as it were,
hostile attitude, was quite disliked by them as they got to know him
better; and they were glad when the sittings were over, and they were
left with a magnificent portrait in their possession, and he gave up
coming. Golenishtchev was the first to give expression to an idea that
had occurred to all of them, which was that Mihailov was simply jealous
of Vronsky.

“Not envious, let us say, since he has _talent_; but it annoys him that
a wealthy man of the highest society, and a count, too (you know they
all detest a title), can, without any particular trouble, do as well,
if not better, than he who has devoted all his life to it. And more
than all, it’s a question of culture, which he is without.”

Vronsky defended Mihailov, but at the bottom of his heart he believed
it, because in his view a man of a different, lower world would be sure
to be envious.

Anna’s portrait—the same subject painted from nature both by him and by
Mihailov—ought to have shown Vronsky the difference between him and
Mihailov; but he did not see it. Only after Mihailov’s portrait was
painted he left off painting his portrait of Anna, deciding that it was
now not needed. His picture of mediæval life he went on with. And he
himself, and Golenishtchev, and still more Anna, thought it very good,
because it was far more like the celebrated pictures they knew than
Mihailov’s picture.

Mihailov meanwhile, although Anna’s portrait greatly fascinated him,
was even more glad than they were when the sittings were over, and he
had no longer to listen to Golenishtchev’s disquisitions upon art, and
could forget about Vronsky’s painting. He knew that Vronsky could not
be prevented from amusing himself with painting; he knew that he and
all dilettanti had a perfect right to paint what they liked, but it was
distasteful to him. A man could not be prevented from making himself a
big wax doll, and kissing it. But if the man were to come with the doll
and sit before a man in love, and begin caressing his doll as the lover
caressed the woman he loved, it would be distasteful to the lover. Just
such a distasteful sensation was what Mihailov felt at the sight of
Vronsky’s painting: he felt it both ludicrous and irritating, both
pitiable and offensive.

Vronsky’s interest in painting and the Middle Ages did not last long.
He had enough taste for painting to be unable to finish his picture.
The picture came to a standstill. He was vaguely aware that its
defects, inconspicuous at first, would be glaring if he were to go on
with it. The same experience befell him as Golenishtchev, who felt that
he had nothing to say, and continually deceived himself with the theory
that his idea was not yet mature, that he was working it out and
collecting materials. This exasperated and tortured Golenishtchev, but
Vronsky was incapable of deceiving and torturing himself, and even more
incapable of exasperation. With his characteristic decision, without
explanation or apology, he simply ceased working at painting.

But without this occupation, the life of Vronsky and of Anna, who
wondered at his loss of interest in it, struck them as intolerably
tedious in an Italian town. The palazzo suddenly seemed so obtrusively
old and dirty, the spots on the curtains, the cracks in the floors, the
broken plaster on the cornices became so disagreeably obvious, and the
everlasting sameness of Golenishtchev, and the Italian professor and
the German traveler became so wearisome, that they had to make some
change. They resolved to go to Russia, to the country. In Petersburg
Vronsky intended to arrange a partition of the land with his brother,
while Anna meant to see her son. The summer they intended to spend on
Vronsky’s great family estate.


Chapter 14

Levin had been married three months. He was happy, but not at all in
the way he had expected to be. At every step he found his former dreams
disappointed, and new, unexpected surprises of happiness. He was happy;
but on entering upon family life he saw at every step that it was
utterly different from what he had imagined. At every step he
experienced what a man would experience who, after admiring the smooth,
happy course of a little boat on a lake, should get himself into that
little boat. He saw that it was not all sitting still, floating
smoothly; that one had to think too, not for an instant to forget where
one was floating; and that there was water under one, and that one must
row; and that his unaccustomed hands would be sore; and that it was
only to look at it that was easy; but that doing it, though very
delightful, was very difficult.

As a bachelor, when he had watched other people’s married life, seen
the petty cares, the squabbles, the jealousy, he had only smiled
contemptuously in his heart. In his future married life there could be,
he was convinced, nothing of that sort; even the external forms,
indeed, he fancied, must be utterly unlike the life of others in
everything. And all of a sudden, instead of his life with his wife
being made on an individual pattern, it was, on the contrary, entirely
made up of the pettiest details, which he had so despised before, but
which now, by no will of his own, had gained an extraordinary
importance that it was useless to contend against. And Levin saw that
the organization of all these details was by no means so easy as he had
fancied before. Although Levin believed himself to have the most exact
conceptions of domestic life, unconsciously, like all men, he pictured
domestic life as the happiest enjoyment of love, with nothing to hinder
and no petty cares to distract. He ought, as he conceived the position,
to do his work, and to find repose from it in the happiness of love.
She ought to be beloved, and nothing more. But, like all men, he forgot
that she too would want work. And he was surprised that she, his
poetic, exquisite Kitty, could, not merely in the first weeks, but even
in the first days of their married life, think, remember, and busy
herself about tablecloths, and furniture, about mattresses for
visitors, about a tray, about the cook, and the dinner, and so on.
While they were still engaged, he had been struck by the definiteness
with which she had declined the tour abroad and decided to go into the
country, as though she knew of something she wanted, and could still
think of something outside her love. This had jarred upon him then, and
now her trivial cares and anxieties jarred upon him several times. But
he saw that this was essential for her. And, loving her as he did,
though he did not understand the reason of them, and jeered at these
domestic pursuits, he could not help admiring them. He jeered at the
way in which she arranged the furniture they had brought from Moscow;
rearranged their room; hung up curtains; prepared rooms for visitors; a
room for Dolly; saw after an abode for her new maid; ordered dinner of
the old cook; came into collision with Agafea Mihalovna, taking from
her the charge of the stores. He saw how the old cook smiled, admiring
her, and listening to her inexperienced, impossible orders, how
mournfully and tenderly Agafea Mihalovna shook her head over the young
mistress’s new arrangements. He saw that Kitty was extraordinarily
sweet when, laughing and crying, she came to tell him that her maid,
Masha, was used to looking upon her as her young lady, and so no one
obeyed her. It seemed to him sweet, but strange, and he thought it
would have been better without this.

He did not know how great a sense of change she was experiencing; she,
who at home had sometimes wanted some favorite dish, or sweets, without
the possibility of getting either, now could order what she liked, buy
pounds of sweets, spend as much money as she liked, and order any
puddings she pleased.

She was dreaming with delight now of Dolly’s coming to them with her
children, especially because she would order for the children their
favorite puddings and Dolly would appreciate all her new housekeeping.
She did not know herself why and wherefore, but the arranging of her
house had an irresistible attraction for her. Instinctively feeling the
approach of spring, and knowing that there would be days of rough
weather too, she built her nest as best she could, and was in haste at
the same time to build it and to learn how to do it.

This care for domestic details in Kitty, so opposed to Levin’s ideal of
exalted happiness, was at first one of the disappointments; and this
sweet care of her household, the aim of which he did not understand,
but could not help loving, was one of the new happy surprises.

Another disappointment and happy surprise came in their quarrels. Levin
could never have conceived that between him and his wife any relations
could arise other than tender, respectful and loving, and all at once
in the very early days they quarreled, so that she said he did not care
for her, that he cared for no one but himself, burst into tears, and
wrung her arms.

This first quarrel arose from Levin’s having gone out to a new
farmhouse and having been away half an hour too long, because he had
tried to get home by a short cut and had lost his way. He drove home
thinking of nothing but her, of her love, of his own happiness, and the
nearer he drew to home, the warmer was his tenderness for her. He ran
into the room with the same feeling, with an even stronger feeling than
he had had when he reached the Shtcherbatskys’ house to make his offer.
And suddenly he was met by a lowering expression he had never seen in
her. He would have kissed her; she pushed him away.

“What is it?”

“You’ve been enjoying yourself,” she began, trying to be calm and
spiteful. But as soon as she opened her mouth, a stream of reproach, of
senseless jealousy, of all that had been torturing her during that half
hour which she had spent sitting motionless at the window, burst from
her. It was only then, for the first time, that he clearly understood
what he had not understood when he led her out of the church after the
wedding. He felt now that he was not simply close to her, but that he
did not know where he ended and she began. He felt this from the
agonizing sensation of division that he experienced at that instant. He
was offended for the first instant, but the very same second he felt
that he could not be offended by her, that she was himself. He felt for
the first moment as a man feels when, having suddenly received a
violent blow from behind, he turns round, angry and eager to avenge
himself, to look for his antagonist, and finds that it is he himself
who has accidentally struck himself, that there is no one to be angry
with, and that he must put up with and try to soothe the pain.

Never afterwards did he feel it with such intensity, but this first
time he could not for a long while get over it. His natural feeling
urged him to defend himself, to prove to her she was wrong; but to
prove her wrong would mean irritating her still more and making the
rupture greater that was the cause of all his suffering. One habitual
feeling impelled him to get rid of the blame and to pass it on to her.
Another feeling, even stronger, impelled him as quickly as possible to
smooth over the rupture without letting it grow greater. To remain
under such undeserved reproach was wretched, but to make her suffer by
justifying himself was worse still. Like a man half-awake in an agony
of pain, he wanted to tear out, to fling away the aching place, and
coming to his senses, he felt that the aching place was himself. He
could do nothing but try to help the aching place to bear it, and this
he tried to do.

They made peace. She, recognizing that she was wrong, though she did
not say so, became tenderer to him, and they experienced new, redoubled
happiness in their love. But that did not prevent such quarrels from
happening again, and exceedingly often too, on the most unexpected and
trivial grounds. These quarrels frequently arose from the fact that
they did not yet know what was of importance to each other and that all
this early period they were both often in a bad temper. When one was in
a good temper, and the other in a bad temper, the peace was not broken;
but when both happened to be in an ill-humor, quarrels sprang up from
such incomprehensibly trifling causes, that they could never remember
afterwards what they had quarreled about. It is true that when they
were both in a good temper their enjoyment of life was redoubled. But
still this first period of their married life was a difficult time for
them.

During all this early time they had a peculiarly vivid sense of
tension, as it were, a tugging in opposite directions of the chain by
which they were bound. Altogether their honeymoon—that is to say, the
month after their wedding—from which from tradition Levin expected so
much, was not merely not a time of sweetness, but remained in the
memories of both as the bitterest and most humiliating period in their
lives. They both alike tried in later life to blot out from their
memories all the monstrous, shameful incidents of that morbid period,
when both were rarely in a normal frame of mind, both were rarely quite
themselves.

It was only in the third month of their married life, after their
return from Moscow, where they had been staying for a month, that their
life began to go more smoothly.


Chapter 15

They had just come back from Moscow, and were glad to be alone. He was
sitting at the writing-table in his study, writing. She, wearing the
dark lilac dress she had worn during the first days of their married
life, and put on again today, a dress particularly remembered and loved
by him, was sitting on the sofa, the same old-fashioned leather sofa
which had always stood in the study in Levin’s father’s and
grandfather’s days. She was sewing at _broderie anglaise_. He thought
and wrote, never losing the happy consciousness of her presence. His
work, both on the land and on the book, in which the principles of the
new land system were to be laid down, had not been abandoned; but just
as formerly these pursuits and ideas had seemed to him petty and
trivial in comparison with the darkness that overspread all life, now
they seemed as unimportant and petty in comparison with the life that
lay before him suffused with the brilliant light of happiness. He went
on with his work, but he felt now that the center of gravity of his
attention had passed to something else, and that consequently he looked
at his work quite differently and more clearly. Formerly this work had
been for him an escape from life. Formerly he had felt that without
this work his life would be too gloomy. Now these pursuits were
necessary for him that life might not be too uniformly bright. Taking
up his manuscript, reading through what he had written, he found with
pleasure that the work was worth his working at. Many of his old ideas
seemed to him superfluous and extreme, but many blanks became distinct
to him when he reviewed the whole thing in his memory. He was writing
now a new chapter on the causes of the present disastrous condition of
agriculture in Russia. He maintained that the poverty of Russia arises
not merely from the anomalous distribution of landed property and
misdirected reforms, but that what had contributed of late years to
this result was the civilization from without abnormally grafted upon
Russia, especially facilities of communication, as railways, leading to
centralization in towns, the development of luxury, and the consequent
development of manufactures, credit and its accompaniment of
speculation—all to the detriment of agriculture. It seemed to him that
in a normal development of wealth in a state all these phenomena would
arise only when a considerable amount of labor had been put into
agriculture, when it had come under regular, or at least definite,
conditions; that the wealth of a country ought to increase
proportionally, and especially in such a way that other sources of
wealth should not outstrip agriculture; that in harmony with a certain
stage of agriculture there should be means of communication
corresponding to it, and that in our unsettled condition of the land,
railways, called into being by political and not by economic needs,
were premature, and instead of promoting agriculture, as was expected
of them, they were competing with agriculture and promoting the
development of manufactures and credit, and so arresting its progress;
and that just as the one-sided and premature development of one organ
in an animal would hinder its general development, so in the general
development of wealth in Russia, credit, facilities of communication,
manufacturing activity, indubitably necessary in Europe, where they had
arisen in their proper time, had with us only done harm, by throwing
into the background the chief question calling for settlement—the
question of the organization of agriculture.

While he was writing his ideas she was thinking how unnaturally cordial
her husband had been to young Prince Tcharsky, who had, with great want
of tact, flirted with her the day before they left Moscow. “He’s
jealous,” she thought. “Goodness! how sweet and silly he is! He’s
jealous of me! If he knew that I think no more of them than of Piotr
the cook,” she thought, looking at his head and red neck with a feeling
of possession strange to herself. “Though it’s a pity to take him from
his work (but he has plenty of time!), I must look at his face; will he
feel I’m looking at him? I wish he’d turn round ... I’ll _will_ him
to!” and she opened her eyes wide, as though to intensify the influence
of her gaze.

“Yes, they draw away all the sap and give a false appearance of
prosperity,” he muttered, stopping to write, and, feeling that she was
looking at him and smiling, he looked round.

“Well?” he queried, smiling, and getting up.

“He looked round,” she thought.

“It’s nothing; I wanted you to look round,” she said, watching him, and
trying to guess whether he was vexed at being interrupted or not.

“How happy we are alone together!—I am, that is,” he said, going up to
her with a radiant smile of happiness.

“I’m just as happy. I’ll never go anywhere, especially not to Moscow.”

“And what were you thinking about?”

“I? I was thinking.... No, no, go along, go on writing; don’t break
off,” she said, pursing up her lips, “and I must cut out these little
holes now, do you see?”

She took up her scissors and began cutting them out.

“No; tell me, what was it?” he said, sitting down beside her and
watching the tiny scissors moving round.

“Oh! what was I thinking about? I was thinking about Moscow, about the
back of your head.”

“Why should I, of all people, have such happiness! It’s unnatural, too
good,” he said, kissing her hand.

“I feel quite the opposite; the better things are, the more natural it
seems to me.”

“And you’ve got a little curl loose,” he said, carefully turning her
head round.

“A little curl, oh yes. No, no, we are busy at our work!”

Work did not progress further, and they darted apart from one another
like culprits when Kouzma came in to announce that tea was ready.

“Have they come from the town?” Levin asked Kouzma.

“They’ve just come; they’re unpacking the things.”

“Come quickly,” she said to him as she went out of the study, “or else
I shall read your letters without you.”

Left alone, after putting his manuscripts together in the new portfolio
bought by her, he washed his hands at the new washstand with the
elegant fittings, that had all made their appearance with her. Levin
smiled at his own thoughts, and shook his head disapprovingly at those
thoughts; a feeling akin to remorse fretted him. There was something
shameful, effeminate, Capuan, as he called it to himself, in his
present mode of life. “It’s not right to go on like this,” he thought.
“It’ll soon be three months, and I’m doing next to nothing. Today,
almost for the first time, I set to work seriously, and what happened?
I did nothing but begin and throw it aside. Even my ordinary pursuits I
have almost given up. On the land I scarcely walk or drive about at all
to look after things. Either I am loath to leave her, or I see she’s
dull alone. And I used to think that, before marriage, life was nothing
much, somehow didn’t count, but that after marriage, life began in
earnest. And here almost three months have passed, and I have spent my
time so idly and unprofitably. No, this won’t do; I must begin. Of
course, it’s not her fault. She’s not to blame in any way. I ought
myself to be firmer, to maintain my masculine independence of action;
or else I shall get into such ways, and she’ll get used to them too....
Of course she’s not to blame,” he told himself.

But it is hard for anyone who is dissatisfied not to blame someone
else, and especially the person nearest of all to him, for the ground
of his dissatisfaction. And it vaguely came into Levin’s mind that she
herself was not to blame (she could not be to blame for anything), but
what was to blame was her education, too superficial and frivolous.
(“That fool Tcharsky: she wanted, I know, to stop him, but didn’t know
how to.”) “Yes, apart from her interest in the house (that she has),
apart from dress and _broderie anglaise_, she has no serious interests.
No interest in her work, in the estate, in the peasants, nor in music,
though she’s rather good at it, nor in reading. She does nothing, and
is perfectly satisfied.” Levin, in his heart, censured this, and did
not as yet understand that she was preparing for that period of
activity which was to come for her when she would at once be the wife
of her husband and mistress of the house, and would bear, and nurse,
and bring up children. He knew not that she was instinctively aware of
this, and preparing herself for this time of terrible toil, did not
reproach herself for the moments of carelessness and happiness in her
love that she enjoyed now while gaily building her nest for the future.


Chapter 16

When Levin went upstairs, his wife was sitting near the new silver
samovar behind the new tea service, and, having settled old Agafea
Mihalovna at a little table with a full cup of tea, was reading a
letter from Dolly, with whom they were in continual and frequent
correspondence.

“You see, your good lady’s settled me here, told me to sit a bit with
her,” said Agafea Mihalovna, smiling affectionately at Kitty.

In these words of Agafea Mihalovna, Levin read the final act of the
drama which had been enacted of late between her and Kitty. He saw
that, in spite of Agafea Mihalovna’s feelings being hurt by a new
mistress taking the reins of government out of her hands, Kitty had yet
conquered her and made her love her.

“Here, I opened your letter too,” said Kitty, handing him an illiterate
letter. “It’s from that woman, I think, your brother’s....” she said.
“I did not read it through. This is from my people and from Dolly.
Fancy! Dolly took Tanya and Grisha to a children’s ball at the
Sarmatskys’: Tanya was a French marquise.”

But Levin did not hear her. Flushing, he took the letter from Marya
Nikolaevna, his brother’s former mistress, and began to read it. This
was the second letter he had received from Marya Nikolaevna. In the
first letter, Marya Nikolaevna wrote that his brother had sent her away
for no fault of hers, and, with touching simplicity, added that though
she was in want again, she asked for nothing, and wished for nothing,
but was only tormented by the thought that Nikolay Dmitrievitch would
come to grief without her, owing to the weak state of his health, and
begged his brother to look after him. Now she wrote quite differently.
She had found Nikolay Dmitrievitch, had again made it up with him in
Moscow, and had moved with him to a provincial town, where he had
received a post in the government service. But that he had quarreled
with the head official, and was on his way back to Moscow, only he had
been taken so ill on the road that it was doubtful if he would ever
leave his bed again, she wrote. “It’s always of you he has talked, and,
besides, he has no more money left.”

“Read this; Dolly writes about you,” Kitty was beginning, with a smile;
but she stopped suddenly, noticing the changed expression on her
husband’s face.

“What is it? What’s the matter?”

“She writes to me that Nikolay, my brother, is at death’s door. I shall
go to him.”

Kitty’s face changed at once. Thoughts of Tanya as a marquise, of
Dolly, all had vanished.

“When are you going?” she said.

“Tomorrow.”

“And I will go with you, can I?” she said.

“Kitty! What are you thinking of?” he said reproachfully.

“How do you mean?” offended that he should seem to take her suggestion
unwillingly and with vexation. “Why shouldn’t I go? I shan’t be in your
way. I....”

“I’m going because my brother is dying,” said Levin. “Why should
you....”

“Why? For the same reason as you.”

“And, at a moment of such gravity for me, she only thinks of her being
dull by herself,” thought Levin. And this lack of candor in a matter of
such gravity infuriated him.

“It’s out of the question,” he said sternly.

Agafea Mihalovna, seeing that it was coming to a quarrel, gently put
down her cup and withdrew. Kitty did not even notice her. The tone in
which her husband had said the last words wounded her, especially
because he evidently did not believe what she had said.

“I tell you, that if you go, I shall come with you; I shall certainly
come,” she said hastily and wrathfully. “Why out of the question? Why
do you say it’s out of the question?”

“Because it’ll be going God knows where, by all sorts of roads and to
all sorts of hotels. You would be a hindrance to me,” said Levin,
trying to be cool.

“Not at all. I don’t want anything. Where you can go, I can....”

“Well, for one thing then, because this woman’s there whom you can’t
meet.”

“I don’t know and don’t care to know who’s there and what. I know that
my husband’s brother is dying and my husband is going to him, and I go
with my husband too....”

“Kitty! Don’t get angry. But just think a little: this is a matter of
such importance that I can’t bear to think that you should bring in a
feeling of weakness, of dislike to being left alone. Come, you’ll be
dull alone, so go and stay at Moscow a little.”

“There, you always ascribe base, vile motives to me,” she said with
tears of wounded pride and fury. “I didn’t mean, it wasn’t weakness, it
wasn’t ... I feel that it’s my duty to be with my husband when he’s in
trouble, but you try on purpose to hurt me, you try on purpose not to
understand....”

“No; this is awful! To be such a slave!” cried Levin, getting up, and
unable to restrain his anger any longer. But at the same second he felt
that he was beating himself.

“Then why did you marry? You could have been free. Why did you, if you
regret it?” she said, getting up and running away into the
drawing-room.

When he went to her, she was sobbing.

He began to speak, trying to find words not to dissuade but simply to
soothe her. But she did not heed him, and would not agree to anything.
He bent down to her and took her hand, which resisted him. He kissed
her hand, kissed her hair, kissed her hand again—still she was silent.
But when he took her face in both his hands and said “Kitty!” she
suddenly recovered herself, and began to cry, and they were reconciled.

It was decided that they should go together the next day. Levin told
his wife that he believed she wanted to go simply in order to be of
use, agreed that Marya Nikolaevna’s being with his brother did not make
her going improper, but he set off at the bottom of his heart
dissatisfied both with her and with himself. He was dissatisfied with
her for being unable to make up her mind to let him go when it was
necessary (and how strange it was for him to think that he, so lately
hardly daring to believe in such happiness as that she could love
him—now was unhappy because she loved him too much!), and he was
dissatisfied with himself for not showing more strength of will. Even
greater was the feeling of disagreement at the bottom of his heart as
to her not needing to consider the woman who was with his brother, and
he thought with horror of all the contingencies they might meet with.
The mere idea of his wife, his Kitty, being in the same room with a
common wench, set him shuddering with horror and loathing.


Chapter 17

The hotel of the provincial town where Nikolay Levin was lying ill was
one of those provincial hotels which are constructed on the newest
model of modern improvements, with the best intentions of cleanliness,
comfort, and even elegance, but owing to the public that patronizes
them, are with astounding rapidity transformed into filthy taverns with
a pretension of modern improvement that only makes them worse than the
old-fashioned, honestly filthy hotels. This hotel had already reached
that stage, and the soldier in a filthy uniform smoking in the entry,
supposed to stand for a hall-porter, and the cast-iron, slippery, dark,
and disagreeable staircase, and the free and easy waiter in a filthy
frock coat, and the common dining-room with a dusty bouquet of wax
flowers adorning the table, and filth, dust, and disorder everywhere,
and at the same time the sort of modern up-to-date self-complacent
railway uneasiness of this hotel, aroused a most painful feeling in
Levin after their fresh young life, especially because the impression
of falsity made by the hotel was so out of keeping with what awaited
them.

As is invariably the case, after they had been asked at what price they
wanted rooms, it appeared that there was not one decent room for them;
one decent room had been taken by the inspector of railroads, another
by a lawyer from Moscow, a third by Princess Astafieva from the
country. There remained only one filthy room, next to which they
promised that another should be empty by the evening. Feeling angry
with his wife because what he had expected had come to pass, which was
that at the moment of arrival, when his heart throbbed with emotion and
anxiety to know how his brother was getting on, he should have to be
seeing after her, instead of rushing straight to his brother, Levin
conducted her to the room assigned them.

“Go, do go!” she said, looking at him with timid and guilty eyes.

He went out of the door without a word, and at once stumbled over Marya
Nikolaevna, who had heard of his arrival and had not dared to go in to
see him. She was just the same as when he saw her in Moscow; the same
woolen gown, and bare arms and neck, and the same good-naturedly
stupid, pockmarked face, only a little plumper.

“Well, how is he? how is he?”

“Very bad. He can’t get up. He has kept expecting you. He.... Are you
... with your wife?”

Levin did not for the first moment understand what it was confused her,
but she immediately enlightened him.

“I’ll go away. I’ll go down to the kitchen,” she brought out. “Nikolay
Dmitrievitch will be delighted. He heard about it, and knows your lady,
and remembers her abroad.”

Levin realized that she meant his wife, and did not know what answer to
make.

“Come along, come along to him!” he said.

But as soon as he moved, the door of his room opened and Kitty peeped
out. Levin crimsoned both from shame and anger with his wife, who had
put herself and him in such a difficult position; but Marya Nikolaevna
crimsoned still more. She positively shrank together and flushed to the
point of tears, and clutching the ends of her apron in both hands,
twisted them in her red fingers without knowing what to say and what to
do.

For the first instant Levin saw an expression of eager curiosity in the
eyes with which Kitty looked at this awful woman, so incomprehensible
to her; but it lasted only a single instant.

“Well! how is he?” she turned to her husband and then to her.

“But one can’t go on talking in the passage like this!” Levin said,
looking angrily at a gentleman who walked jauntily at that instant
across the corridor, as though about his affairs.

“Well then, come in,” said Kitty, turning to Marya Nikolaevna, who had
recovered herself, but noticing her husband’s face of dismay, “or go
on; go, and then come for me,” she said, and went back into the room.

Levin went to his brother’s room. He had not in the least expected what
he saw and felt in his brother’s room. He had expected to find him in
the same state of self-deception which he had heard was so frequent
with the consumptive, and which had struck him so much during his
brother’s visit in the autumn. He had expected to find the physical
signs of the approach of death more marked—greater weakness, greater
emaciation, but still almost the same condition of things. He had
expected himself to feel the same distress at the loss of the brother
he loved and the same horror in face of death as he had felt then, only
in a greater degree. And he had prepared himself for this; but he found
something utterly different.

In a little dirty room with the painted panels of its walls filthy with
spittle, and conversation audible through the thin partition from the
next room, in a stifling atmosphere saturated with impurities, on a
bedstead moved away from the wall, there lay covered with a quilt, a
body. One arm of this body was above the quilt, and the wrist, huge as
a rake-handle, was attached, inconceivably it seemed, to the thin, long
bone of the arm smooth from the beginning to the middle. The head lay
sideways on the pillow. Levin could see the scanty locks wet with sweat
on the temples and tense, transparent-looking forehead.

“It cannot be that that fearful body was my brother Nikolay?” thought
Levin. But he went closer, saw the face, and doubt became impossible.
In spite of the terrible change in the face, Levin had only to glance
at those eager eyes raised at his approach, only to catch the faint
movement of the mouth under the sticky mustache, to realize the
terrible truth that this death-like body was his living brother.

The glittering eyes looked sternly and reproachfully at his brother as
he drew near. And immediately this glance established a living
relationship between living men. Levin immediately felt the reproach in
the eyes fixed on him, and felt remorse at his own happiness.

When Konstantin took him by the hand, Nikolay smiled. The smile was
faint, scarcely perceptible, and in spite of the smile the stern
expression of the eyes was unchanged.

“You did not expect to find me like this,” he articulated with effort.

“Yes ... no,” said Levin, hesitating over his words. “How was it you
didn’t let me know before, that is, at the time of my wedding? I made
inquiries in all directions.”

He had to talk so as not to be silent, and he did not know what to say,
especially as his brother made no reply, and simply stared without
dropping his eyes, and evidently penetrated to the inner meaning of
each word. Levin told his brother that his wife had come with him.
Nikolay expressed pleasure, but said he was afraid of frightening her
by his condition. A silence followed. Suddenly Nikolay stirred, and
began to say something. Levin expected something of peculiar gravity
and importance from the expression of his face, but Nikolay began
speaking of his health. He found fault with the doctor, regretting he
had not a celebrated Moscow doctor. Levin saw that he still hoped.

Seizing the first moment of silence, Levin got up, anxious to escape,
if only for an instant, from his agonizing emotion, and said that he
would go and fetch his wife.

“Very well, and I’ll tell her to tidy up here. It’s dirty and stinking
here, I expect. Marya! clear up the room,” the sick man said with
effort. “Oh, and when you’ve cleared up, go away yourself,” he added,
looking inquiringly at his brother.

Levin made no answer. Going out into the corridor, he stopped short. He
had said he would fetch his wife, but now, taking stock of the emotion
he was feeling, he decided that he would try on the contrary to
persuade her not to go in to the sick man. “Why should she suffer as I
am suffering?” he thought.

“Well, how is he?” Kitty asked with a frightened face.

“Oh, it’s awful, it’s awful! What did you come for?” said Levin.

Kitty was silent for a few seconds, looking timidly and ruefully at her
husband; then she went up and took him by the elbow with both hands.

“Kostya! take me to him; it will be easier for us to bear it together.
You only take me, take me to him, please, and go away,” she said. “You
must understand that for me to see you, and not to see him, is far more
painful. There I might be a help to you and to him. Please, let me!”
she besought her husband, as though the happiness of her life depended
on it.

Levin was obliged to agree, and regaining his composure, and completely
forgetting about Marya Nikolaevna by now, he went again in to his
brother with Kitty.

Stepping lightly, and continually glancing at her husband, showing him
a valorous and sympathetic face, Kitty went into the sick-room, and,
turning without haste, noiselessly closed the door. With inaudible
steps she went quickly to the sick man’s bedside, and going up so that
he had not to turn his head, she immediately clasped in her fresh young
hand the skeleton of his huge hand, pressed it, and began speaking with
that soft eagerness, sympathetic and not jarring, which is peculiar to
women.

“We have met, though we were not acquainted, at Soden,” she said. “You
never thought I was to be your sister?”

“You would not have recognized me?” he said, with a radiant smile at
her entrance.

“Yes, I should. What a good thing you let us know! Not a day has passed
that Kostya has not mentioned you, and been anxious.”

But the sick man’s interest did not last long.

Before she had finished speaking, there had come back into his face the
stern, reproachful expression of the dying man’s envy of the living.

“I am afraid you are not quite comfortable here,” she said, turning
away from his fixed stare, and looking about the room. “We must ask
about another room,” she said to her husband, “so that we might be
nearer.”


Chapter 18

Levin could not look calmly at his brother; he could not himself be
natural and calm in his presence. When he went in to the sick man, his
eyes and his attention were unconsciously dimmed, and he did not see
and did not distinguish the details of his brother’s position. He smelt
the awful odor, saw the dirt, disorder, and miserable condition, and
heard the groans, and felt that nothing could be done to help. It never
entered his head to analyze the details of the sick man’s situation, to
consider how that body was lying under the quilt, how those emaciated
legs and thighs and spine were lying huddled up, and whether they could
not be made more comfortable, whether anything could not be done to
make things, if not better, at least less bad. It made his blood run
cold when he began to think of all these details. He was absolutely
convinced that nothing could be done to prolong his brother’s life or
to relieve his suffering. But a sense of his regarding all aid as out
of the question was felt by the sick man, and exasperated him. And this
made it still more painful for Levin. To be in the sick-room was agony
to him, not to be there still worse. And he was continually, on various
pretexts, going out of the room, and coming in again, because he was
unable to remain alone.

But Kitty thought, and felt, and acted quite differently. On seeing the
sick man, she pitied him. And pity in her womanly heart did not arouse
at all that feeling of horror and loathing that it aroused in her
husband, but a desire to act, to find out all the details of his state,
and to remedy them. And since she had not the slightest doubt that it
was her duty to help him, she had no doubt either that it was possible,
and immediately set to work. The very details, the mere thought of
which reduced her husband to terror, immediately engaged her attention.
She sent for the doctor, sent to the chemist’s, set the maid who had
come with her and Marya Nikolaevna to sweep and dust and scrub; she
herself washed up something, washed out something else, laid something
under the quilt. Something was by her directions brought into the
sick-room, something else was carried out. She herself went several
times to her room, regardless of the men she met in the corridor, got
out and brought in sheets, pillow cases, towels, and shirts.

The waiter, who was busy with a party of engineers dining in the dining
hall, came several times with an irate countenance in answer to her
summons, and could not avoid carrying out her orders, as she gave them
with such gracious insistence that there was no evading her. Levin did
not approve of all this; he did not believe it would be of any good to
the patient. Above all, he feared the patient would be angry at it. But
the sick man, though he seemed and was indifferent about it, was not
angry, but only abashed, and on the whole as it were interested in what
she was doing with him. Coming back from the doctor to whom Kitty had
sent him, Levin, on opening the door, came upon the sick man at the
instant when, by Kitty’s directions, they were changing his linen. The
long white ridge of his spine, with the huge, prominent shoulder blades
and jutting ribs and vertebrae, was bare, and Marya Nikolaevna and the
waiter were struggling with the sleeve of the night shirt, and could
not get the long, limp arm into it. Kitty, hurriedly closing the door
after Levin, was not looking that way; but the sick man groaned, and
she moved rapidly towards him.

“Make haste,” she said.

“Oh, don’t you come,” said the sick man angrily. “I’ll do it my
myself....”

“What say?” queried Marya Nikolaevna. But Kitty heard and saw he was
ashamed and uncomfortable at being naked before her.

“I’m not looking, I’m not looking!” she said, putting the arm in.
“Marya Nikolaevna, you come this side, you do it,” she added.

“Please go for me, there’s a little bottle in my small bag,” she said,
turning to her husband, “you know, in the side pocket; bring it,
please, and meanwhile they’ll finish clearing up here.”

Returning with the bottle, Levin found the sick man settled comfortably
and everything about him completely changed. The heavy smell was
replaced by the smell of aromatic vinegar, which Kitty with pouting
lips and puffed-out, rosy cheeks was squirting through a little pipe.
There was no dust visible anywhere, a rug was laid by the bedside. On
the table stood medicine bottles and decanters tidily arranged, and the
linen needed was folded up there, and Kitty’s _broderie anglaise_. On
the other table by the patient’s bed there were candles and drink and
powders. The sick man himself, washed and combed, lay in clean sheets
on high raised pillows, in a clean night-shirt with a white collar
about his astoundingly thin neck, and with a new expression of hope
looked fixedly at Kitty.

The doctor brought by Levin, and found by him at the club, was not the
one who had been attending Nikolay Levin, as the patient was
dissatisfied with him. The new doctor took up a stethoscope and sounded
the patient, shook his head, prescribed medicine, and with extreme
minuteness explained first how to take the medicine and then what diet
was to be kept to. He advised eggs, raw or hardly cooked, and seltzer
water, with warm milk at a certain temperature. When the doctor had
gone away the sick man said something to his brother, of which Levin
could distinguish only the last words: “Your Katya.” By the expression
with which he gazed at her, Levin saw that he was praising her. He
called indeed to Katya, as he called her.

“I’m much better already,” he said. “Why, with you I should have got
well long ago. How nice it is!” he took her hand and drew it towards
his lips, but as though afraid she would dislike it he changed his
mind, let it go, and only stroked it. Kitty took his hand in both hers
and pressed it.

“Now turn me over on the left side and go to bed,” he said.

No one could make out what he said but Kitty; she alone understood. She
understood because she was all the while mentally keeping watch on what
he needed.

“On the other side,” she said to her husband, “he always sleeps on that
side. Turn him over, it’s so disagreeable calling the servants. I’m not
strong enough. Can you?” she said to Marya Nikolaevna.

“I’m afraid not,” answered Marya Nikolaevna.

Terrible as it was to Levin to put his arms round that terrible body,
to take hold of that under the quilt, of which he preferred to know
nothing, under his wife’s influence he made his resolute face that she
knew so well, and putting his arms into the bed took hold of the body,
but in spite of his own strength he was struck by the strange heaviness
of those powerless limbs. While he was turning him over, conscious of
the huge emaciated arm about his neck, Kitty swiftly and noiselessly
turned the pillow, beat it up and settled in it the sick man’s head,
smoothing back his hair, which was sticking again to his moist brow.

The sick man kept his brother’s hand in his own. Levin felt that he
meant to do something with his hand and was pulling it somewhere. Levin
yielded with a sinking heart: yes, he drew it to his mouth and kissed
it. Levin, shaking with sobs and unable to articulate a word, went out
of the room.


Chapter 19

“Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast
revealed them unto babes.” So Levin thought about his wife as he talked
to her that evening.

Levin thought of the text, not because he considered himself “wise and
prudent.” He did not so consider himself, but he could not help knowing
that he had more intellect than his wife and Agafea Mihalovna, and he
could not help knowing that when he thought of death, he thought with
all the force of his intellect. He knew too that the brains of many
great men, whose thoughts he had read, had brooded over death and yet
knew not a hundredth part of what his wife and Agafea Mihalovna knew
about it. Different as those two women were, Agafea Mihalovna and
Katya, as his brother Nikolay had called her, and as Levin particularly
liked to call her now, they were quite alike in this. Both knew,
without a shade of doubt, what sort of thing life was and what was
death, and though neither of them could have answered, and would even
not have understood the questions that presented themselves to Levin,
both had no doubt of the significance of this event, and were precisely
alike in their way of looking at it, which they shared with millions of
people. The proof that they knew for a certainty the nature of death
lay in the fact that they knew without a second of hesitation how to
deal with the dying, and were not frightened of them. Levin and other
men like him, though they could have said a great deal about death,
obviously did not know this since they were afraid of death, and were
absolutely at a loss what to do when people were dying. If Levin had
been alone now with his brother Nikolay, he would have looked at him
with terror, and with still greater terror waited, and would not have
known what else to do.

More than that, he did not know what to say, how to look, how to move.
To talk of outside things seemed to him shocking, impossible, to talk
of death and depressing subjects—also impossible. To be silent, also
impossible. “If I look at him he will think I am studying him, I am
afraid; if I don’t look at him, he’ll think I’m thinking of other
things. If I walk on tiptoe, he will be vexed; to tread firmly, I’m
ashamed.” Kitty evidently did not think of herself, and had no time to
think about herself: she was thinking about him because she knew
something, and all went well. She told him about herself even and about
her wedding, and smiled and sympathized with him and petted him, and
talked of cases of recovery and all went well; so then she must know.
The proof that her behavior and Agafea Mihalovna’s was not instinctive,
animal, irrational, was that apart from the physical treatment, the
relief of suffering, both Agafea Mihalovna and Kitty required for the
dying man something else more important than the physical treatment,
and something which had nothing in common with physical conditions.
Agafea Mihalovna, speaking of the man just dead, had said: “Well, thank
God, he took the sacrament and received absolution; God grant each one
of us such a death.” Katya in just the same way, besides all her care
about linen, bedsores, drink, found time the very first day to persuade
the sick man of the necessity of taking the sacrament and receiving
absolution.

On getting back from the sick-room to their own two rooms for the
night, Levin sat with hanging head not knowing what to do. Not to speak
of supper, of preparing for bed, of considering what they were going to
do, he could not even talk to his wife; he was ashamed to. Kitty, on
the contrary, was more active than usual. She was even livelier than
usual. She ordered supper to be brought, herself unpacked their things,
and herself helped to make the beds, and did not even forget to
sprinkle them with Persian powder. She showed that alertness, that
swiftness of reflection which comes out in men before a battle, in
conflict, in the dangerous and decisive moments of life—those moments
when a man shows once and for all his value, and that all his past has
not been wasted but has been a preparation for these moments.

Everything went rapidly in her hands, and before it was twelve o’clock
all their things were arranged cleanly and tidily in her rooms, in such
a way that the hotel rooms seemed like home: the beds were made,
brushes, combs, looking-glasses were put out, table napkins were
spread.

Levin felt that it was unpardonable to eat, to sleep, to talk even now,
and it seemed to him that every movement he made was unseemly. She
arranged the brushes, but she did it all so that there was nothing
shocking in it.

They could neither of them eat, however, and for a long while they
could not sleep, and did not even go to bed.

“I am very glad I persuaded him to receive extreme unction tomorrow,”
she said, sitting in her dressing jacket before her folding
looking-glass, combing her soft, fragrant hair with a fine comb. “I
have never seen it, but I know, mamma has told me, there are prayers
said for recovery.”

“Do you suppose he can possibly recover?” said Levin, watching a
slender tress at the back of her round little head that was continually
hidden when she passed the comb through the front.

“I asked the doctor; he said he couldn’t live more than three days. But
can they be sure? I’m very glad, anyway, that I persuaded him,” she
said, looking askance at her husband through her hair. “Anything is
possible,” she added with that peculiar, rather sly expression that was
always in her face when she spoke of religion.

Since their conversation about religion when they were engaged neither
of them had ever started a discussion of the subject, but she performed
all the ceremonies of going to church, saying her prayers, and so on,
always with the unvarying conviction that this ought to be so. In spite
of his assertion to the contrary, she was firmly persuaded that he was
as much a Christian as she, and indeed a far better one; and all that
he said about it was simply one of his absurd masculine freaks, just as
he would say about her _broderie anglaise_ that good people patch
holes, but that she cut them on purpose, and so on.

“Yes, you see this woman, Marya Nikolaevna, did not know how to manage
all this,” said Levin. “And ... I must own I’m very, very glad you
came. You are such purity that....” He took her hand and did not kiss
it (to kiss her hand in such closeness to death seemed to him
improper); he merely squeezed it with a penitent air, looking at her
brightening eyes.

“It would have been miserable for you to be alone,” she said, and
lifting her hands which hid her cheeks flushing with pleasure, twisted
her coil of hair on the nape of her neck and pinned it there. “No,” she
went on, “she did not know how.... Luckily, I learned a lot at Soden.”

“Surely there are not people there so ill?”

“Worse.”

“What’s so awful to me is that I can’t see him as he was when he was
young. You would not believe how charming he was as a youth, but I did
not understand him then.”

“I can quite, quite believe it. How I feel that we might have been
friends!” she said; and, distressed at what she had said, she looked
round at her husband, and tears came into her eyes.

“Yes, _might have been_,” he said mournfully. “He’s just one of those
people of whom they say they’re not for this world.”

“But we have many days before us; we must go to bed,” said Kitty,
glancing at her tiny watch.


Chapter 20

The next day the sick man received the sacrament and extreme unction.
During the ceremony Nikolay Levin prayed fervently. His great eyes,
fastened on the holy image that was set out on a card-table covered
with a colored napkin, expressed such passionate prayer and hope that
it was awful to Levin to see it. Levin knew that this passionate prayer
and hope would only make him feel more bitterly parting from the life
he so loved. Levin knew his brother and the workings of his intellect:
he knew that his unbelief came not from life being easier for him
without faith, but had grown up because step by step the contemporary
scientific interpretation of natural phenomena crushed out the
possibility of faith; and so he knew that his present return was not a
legitimate one, brought about by way of the same working of his
intellect, but simply a temporary, interested return to faith in a
desperate hope of recovery. Levin knew too that Kitty had strengthened
his hope by accounts of the marvelous recoveries she had heard of.
Levin knew all this; and it was agonizingly painful to him to behold
the supplicating, hopeful eyes and the emaciated wrist, lifted with
difficulty, making the sign of the cross on the tense brow, and the
prominent shoulders and hollow, gasping chest, which one could not feel
consistent with the life the sick man was praying for. During the
sacrament Levin did what he, an unbeliever, had done a thousand times.
He said, addressing God, “If Thou dost exist, make this man to recover”
(of course this same thing has been repeated many times), “and Thou
wilt save him and me.”

After extreme unction the sick man became suddenly much better. He did
not cough once in the course of an hour, smiled, kissed Kitty’s hand,
thanking her with tears, and said he was comfortable, free from pain,
and that he felt strong and had an appetite. He even raised himself
when his soup was brought, and asked for a cutlet as well. Hopelessly
ill as he was, obvious as it was at the first glance that he could not
recover, Levin and Kitty were for that hour both in the same state of
excitement, happy, though fearful of being mistaken.

“Is he better?”

“Yes, much.”

“It’s wonderful.”

“There’s nothing wonderful in it.”

“Anyway, he’s better,” they said in a whisper, smiling to one another.

This self-deception was not of long duration. The sick man fell into a
quiet sleep, but he was waked up half an hour later by his cough. And
all at once every hope vanished in those about him and in himself. The
reality of his suffering crushed all hopes in Levin and Kitty and in
the sick man himself, leaving no doubt, no memory even of past hopes.

Without referring to what he had believed in half an hour before, as
though ashamed even to recall it, he asked for iodine to inhale in a
bottle covered with perforated paper. Levin gave him the bottle, and
the same look of passionate hope with which he had taken the sacrament
was now fastened on his brother, demanding from him the confirmation of
the doctor’s words that inhaling iodine worked wonders.

“Is Katya not here?” he gasped, looking round while Levin reluctantly
assented to the doctor’s words. “No; so I can say it.... It was for her
sake I went through that farce. She’s so sweet; but you and I can’t
deceive ourselves. This is what I believe in,” he said, and, squeezing
the bottle in his bony hand, he began breathing over it.

At eight o’clock in the evening Levin and his wife were drinking tea in
their room when Marya Nikolaevna ran in to them breathlessly. She was
pale, and her lips were quivering. “He is dying!” she whispered. “I’m
afraid will die this minute.”

Both of them ran to him. He was sitting raised up with one elbow on the
bed, his long back bent, and his head hanging low.

“How do you feel?” Levin asked in a whisper, after a silence.

“I feel I’m setting off,” Nikolay said with difficulty, but with
extreme distinctness, screwing the words out of himself. He did not
raise his head, but simply turned his eyes upwards, without their
reaching his brother’s face. “Katya, go away!” he added.

Levin jumped up, and with a peremptory whisper made her go out.

“I’m setting off,” he said again.

“Why do you think so?” said Levin, so as to say something.

“Because I’m setting off,” he repeated, as though he had a liking for
the phrase. “It’s the end.”

Marya Nikolaevna went up to him.

“You had better lie down; you’d be easier,” she said.

“I shall lie down soon enough,” he pronounced slowly, “when I’m dead,”
he said sarcastically, wrathfully. “Well, you can lay me down if you
like.”

Levin laid his brother on his back, sat down beside him, and gazed at
his face, holding his breath. The dying man lay with closed eyes, but
the muscles twitched from time to time on his forehead, as with one
thinking deeply and intensely. Levin involuntarily thought with him of
what it was that was happening to him now, but in spite of all his
mental efforts to go along with him he saw by the expression of that
calm, stern face that for the dying man all was growing clearer and
clearer that was still as dark as ever for Levin.

“Yes, yes, so,” the dying man articulated slowly at intervals. “Wait a
little.” He was silent. “Right!” he pronounced all at once
reassuringly, as though all were solved for him. “O Lord!” he murmured,
and sighed deeply.

Marya Nikolaevna felt his feet. “They’re getting cold,” she whispered.

For a long while, a very long while it seemed to Levin, the sick man
lay motionless. But he was still alive, and from time to time he
sighed. Levin by now was exhausted from mental strain. He felt that,
with no mental effort, could he understand what it was that was
_right_. He could not even think of the problem of death itself, but
with no will of his own thoughts kept coming to him of what he had to
do next; closing the dead man’s eyes, dressing him, ordering the
coffin. And, strange to say, he felt utterly cold, and was not
conscious of sorrow nor of loss, less still of pity for his brother. If
he had any feeling for his brother at that moment, it was envy for the
knowledge the dying man had now that he could not have.

A long time more he sat over him so, continually expecting the end. But
the end did not come. The door opened and Kitty appeared. Levin got up
to stop her. But at the moment he was getting up, he caught the sound
of the dying man stirring.

“Don’t go away,” said Nikolay and held out his hand. Levin gave him
his, and angrily waved to his wife to go away.

With the dying man’s hand in his hand, he sat for half an hour, an
hour, another hour. He did not think of death at all now. He wondered
what Kitty was doing; who lived in the next room; whether the doctor
lived in a house of his own. He longed for food and for sleep. He
cautiously drew away his hand and felt the feet. The feet were cold,
but the sick man was still breathing. Levin tried again to move away on
tiptoe, but the sick man stirred again and said: “Don’t go.”

The dawn came; the sick man’s condition was unchanged. Levin stealthily
withdrew his hand, and without looking at the dying man, went off to
his own room and went to sleep. When he woke up, instead of news of his
brother’s death which he expected, he learned that the sick man had
returned to his earlier condition. He had begun sitting up again,
coughing, had begun eating again, talking again, and again had ceased
to talk of death, again had begun to express hope of his recovery, and
had become more irritable and more gloomy than ever. No one, neither
his brother nor Kitty, could soothe him. He was angry with everyone,
and said nasty things to everyone, reproached everyone for his
sufferings, and insisted that they should get him a celebrated doctor
from Moscow. To all inquiries made him as to how he felt, he made the
same answer with an expression of vindictive reproachfulness, “I’m
suffering horribly, intolerably!”

The sick man was suffering more and more, especially from bedsores,
which it was impossible now to remedy, and grew more and more angry
with everyone about him, blaming them for everything, and especially
for not having brought him a doctor from Moscow. Kitty tried in every
possible way to relieve him, to soothe him; but it was all in vain, and
Levin saw that she herself was exhausted both physically and morally,
though she would not admit it. The sense of death, which had been
evoked in all by his taking leave of life on the night when he had sent
for his brother, was broken up. Everyone knew that he must inevitably
die soon, that he was half dead already. Everyone wished for nothing
but that he should die as soon as possible, and everyone, concealing
this, gave him medicines, tried to find remedies and doctors, and
deceived him and themselves and each other. All this was falsehood,
disgusting, irreverent deceit. And owing to the bent of his character,
and because he loved the dying man more than anyone else did, Levin was
most painfully conscious of this deceit.

Levin, who had long been possessed by the idea of reconciling his
brothers, at least in face of death, had written to his brother, Sergey
Ivanovitch, and having received an answer from him, he read this letter
to the sick man. Sergey Ivanovitch wrote that he could not come
himself, and in touching terms he begged his brother’s forgiveness.

The sick man said nothing.

“What am I to write to him?” said Levin. “I hope you are not angry with
him?”

“No, not the least!” Nikolay answered, vexed at the question. “Tell him
to send me a doctor.”

Three more days of agony followed; the sick man was still in the same
condition. The sense of longing for his death was felt by everyone now
at the mere sight of him, by the waiters and the hotel-keeper and all
the people staying in the hotel, and the doctor and Marya Nikolaevna
and Levin and Kitty. The sick man alone did not express this feeling,
but on the contrary was furious at their not getting him doctors, and
went on taking medicine and talking of life. Only at rare moments, when
the opium gave him an instant’s relief from the never-ceasing pain, he
would sometimes, half asleep, utter what was ever more intense in his
heart than in all the others: “Oh, if it were only the end!” or: “When
will it be over?”

His sufferings, steadily growing more intense, did their work and
prepared him for death. There was no position in which he was not in
pain, there was not a minute in which he was unconscious of it, not a
limb, not a part of his body that did not ache and cause him agony.
Even the memories, the impressions, the thoughts of this body awakened
in him now the same aversion as the body itself. The sight of other
people, their remarks, his own reminiscences, everything was for him a
source of agony. Those about him felt this, and instinctively did not
allow themselves to move freely, to talk, to express their wishes
before him. All his life was merged in the one feeling of suffering and
desire to be rid of it.

There was evidently coming over him that revulsion that would make him
look upon death as the goal of his desires, as happiness. Hitherto each
individual desire, aroused by suffering or privation, such as hunger,
fatigue, thirst, had been satisfied by some bodily function giving
pleasure. But now no physical craving or suffering received relief, and
the effort to relieve them only caused fresh suffering. And so all
desires were merged in one—the desire to be rid of all his sufferings
and their source, the body. But he had no words to express this desire
of deliverance, and so he did not speak of it, and from habit asked for
the satisfaction of desires which could not now be satisfied. “Turn me
over on the other side,” he would say, and immediately after he would
ask to be turned back again as before. “Give me some broth. Take away
the broth. Talk of something: why are you silent?” And directly they
began to talk he would close his eyes, and would show weariness,
indifference, and loathing.

On the tenth day from their arrival at the town, Kitty was unwell. She
suffered from headache and sickness, and she could not get up all the
morning.

The doctor opined that the indisposition arose from fatigue and
excitement, and prescribed rest.

After dinner, however, Kitty got up and went as usual with her work to
the sick man. He looked at her sternly when she came in, and smiled
contemptuously when she said she had been unwell. That day he was
continually blowing his nose, and groaning piteously.

“How do you feel?” she asked him.

“Worse,” he articulated with difficulty. “In pain!”

“In pain, where?”

“Everywhere.”

“It will be over today, you will see,” said Marya Nikolaevna. Though it
was said in a whisper, the sick man, whose hearing Levin had noticed
was very keen, must have heard. Levin said hush to her, and looked
round at the sick man. Nikolay had heard; but these words produced no
effect on him. His eyes had still the same intense, reproachful look.

“Why do you think so?” Levin asked her, when she had followed him into
the corridor.

“He has begun picking at himself,” said Marya Nikolaevna.

“How do you mean?”

“Like this,” she said, tugging at the folds of her woolen skirt. Levin
noticed, indeed, that all that day the patient pulled at himself, as it
were, trying to snatch something away.

Marya Nikolaevna’s prediction came true. Towards night the sick man was
not able to lift his hands, and could only gaze before him with the
same intensely concentrated expression in his eyes. Even when his
brother or Kitty bent over him, so that he could see them, he looked
just the same. Kitty sent for the priest to read the prayer for the
dying.

While the priest was reading it, the dying man did not show any sign of
life; his eyes were closed. Levin, Kitty, and Marya Nikolaevna stood at
the bedside. The priest had not quite finished reading the prayer when
the dying man stretched, sighed, and opened his eyes. The priest, on
finishing the prayer, put the cross to the cold forehead, then slowly
returned it to the stand, and after standing for two minutes more in
silence, he touched the huge, bloodless hand that was turning cold.

“He is gone,” said the priest, and would have moved away; but suddenly
there was a faint stir in the mustaches of the dead man that seemed
glued together, and quite distinctly in the hush they heard from the
bottom of the chest the sharply defined sounds:

“Not quite ... soon.”

And a minute later the face brightened, a smile came out under the
mustaches, and the women who had gathered round began carefully laying
out the corpse.

The sight of his brother, and the nearness of death, revived in Levin
that sense of horror in face of the insoluble enigma, together with the
nearness and inevitability of death, that had come upon him that autumn
evening when his brother had come to him. This feeling was now even
stronger than before; even less than before did he feel capable of
apprehending the meaning of death, and its inevitability rose up before
him more terrible than ever. But now, thanks to his wife’s presence,
that feeling did not reduce him to despair. In spite of death, he felt
the need of life and love. He felt that love saved him from despair,
and that this love, under the menace of despair, had become still
stronger and purer. The one mystery of death, still unsolved, had
scarcely passed before his eyes, when another mystery had arisen, as
insoluble, urging him to love and to life.

The doctor confirmed his suppositions in regard to Kitty. Her
indisposition was a symptom that she was with child.


Chapter 21

From the moment when Alexey Alexandrovitch understood from his
interviews with Betsy and with Stepan Arkadyevitch that all that was
expected of him was to leave his wife in peace, without burdening her
with his presence, and that his wife herself desired this, he felt so
distraught that he could come to no decision of himself; he did not
know himself what he wanted now, and putting himself in the hands of
those who were so pleased to interest themselves in his affairs, he met
everything with unqualified assent. It was only when Anna had left his
house, and the English governess sent to ask him whether she should
dine with him or separately, that for the first time he clearly
comprehended his position, and was appalled by it. Most difficult of
all in this position was the fact that he could not in any way connect
and reconcile his past with what was now. It was not the past when he
had lived happily with his wife that troubled him. The transition from
that past to a knowledge of his wife’s unfaithfulness he had lived
through miserably already; that state was painful, but he could
understand it. If his wife had then, on declaring to him her
unfaithfulness, left him, he would have been wounded, unhappy, but he
would not have been in the hopeless position—incomprehensible to
himself—in which he felt himself now. He could not now reconcile his
immediate past, his tenderness, his love for his sick wife, and for the
other man’s child with what was now the case, that is with the fact
that, as it were, in return for all this he now found himself alone,
put to shame, a laughing-stock, needed by no one, and despised by
everyone.

For the first two days after his wife’s departure Alexey Alexandrovitch
received applicants for assistance and his chief secretary, drove to
the committee, and went down to dinner in the dining-room as usual.
Without giving himself a reason for what he was doing, he strained
every nerve of his being for those two days, simply to preserve an
appearance of composure, and even of indifference. Answering inquiries
about the disposition of Anna Arkadyevna’s rooms and belongings, he had
exercised immense self-control to appear like a man in whose eyes what
had occurred was not unforeseen nor out of the ordinary course of
events, and he attained his aim: no one could have detected in him
signs of despair. But on the second day after her departure, when
Korney gave him a bill from a fashionable draper’s shop, which Anna had
forgotten to pay, and announced that the clerk from the shop was
waiting, Alexey Alexandrovitch told him to show the clerk up.

“Excuse me, your excellency, for venturing to trouble you. But if you
direct us to apply to her excellency, would you graciously oblige us
with her address?”

Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, as it seemed to the clerk, and all at
once, turning round, he sat down at the table. Letting his head sink
into his hands, he sat for a long while in that position, several times
attempted to speak and stopped short. Korney, perceiving his master’s
emotion, asked the clerk to call another time. Left alone, Alexey
Alexandrovitch recognized that he had not the strength to keep up the
line of firmness and composure any longer. He gave orders for the
carriage that was awaiting him to be taken back, and for no one to be
admitted, and he did not go down to dinner.

He felt that he could not endure the weight of universal contempt and
exasperation, which he had distinctly seen in the face of the clerk and
of Korney, and of everyone, without exception, whom he had met during
those two days. He felt that he could not turn aside from himself the
hatred of men, because that hatred did not come from his being bad (in
that case he could have tried to be better), but from his being
shamefully and repulsively unhappy. He knew that for this, for the very
fact that his heart was torn with grief, they would be merciless to
him. He felt that men would crush him as dogs strangle a torn dog
yelping with pain. He knew that his sole means of security against
people was to hide his wounds from them, and instinctively he tried to
do this for two days, but now he felt incapable of keeping up the
unequal struggle.

His despair was even intensified by the consciousness that he was
utterly alone in his sorrow. In all Petersburg there was not a human
being to whom he could express what he was feeling, who would feel for
him, not as a high official, not as a member of society, but simply as
a suffering man; indeed he had not such a one in the whole world.

Alexey Alexandrovitch grew up an orphan. There were two brothers. They
did not remember their father, and their mother died when Alexey
Alexandrovitch was ten years old. The property was a small one. Their
uncle, Karenin, a government official of high standing, at one time a
favorite of the late Tsar, had brought them up.

On completing his high school and university courses with medals,
Alexey Alexandrovitch had, with his uncle’s aid, immediately started in
a prominent position in the service, and from that time forward he had
devoted himself exclusively to political ambition. In the high school
and the university, and afterwards in the service, Alexey
Alexandrovitch had never formed a close friendship with anyone. His
brother had been the person nearest to his heart, but he had a post in
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and was always abroad, where he had
died shortly after Alexey Alexandrovitch’s marriage.

While he was governor of a province, Anna’s aunt, a wealthy provincial
lady, had thrown him—middle-aged as he was, though young for a
governor—with her niece, and had succeeded in putting him in such a
position that he had either to declare himself or to leave the town.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was not long in hesitation. There were at the
time as many reasons for the step as against it, and there was no
overbalancing consideration to outweigh his invariable rule of
abstaining when in doubt. But Anna’s aunt had through a common
acquaintance insinuated that he had already compromised the girl, and
that he was in honor bound to make her an offer. He made the offer, and
concentrated on his betrothed and his wife all the feeling of which he
was capable.

The attachment he felt to Anna precluded in his heart every need of
intimate relations with others. And now among all his acquaintances he
had not one friend. He had plenty of so-called connections, but no
friendships. Alexey Alexandrovitch had plenty of people whom he could
invite to dinner, to whose sympathy he could appeal in any public
affair he was concerned about, whose interest he could reckon upon for
anyone he wished to help, with whom he could candidly discuss other
people’s business and affairs of state. But his relations with these
people were confined to one clearly defined channel, and had a certain
routine from which it was impossible to depart. There was one man, a
comrade of his at the university, with whom he had made friends later,
and with whom he could have spoken of a personal sorrow; but this
friend had a post in the Department of Education in a remote part of
Russia. Of the people in Petersburg the most intimate and most possible
were his chief secretary and his doctor.

Mihail Vassilievitch Sludin, the chief secretary, was a
straightforward, intelligent, good-hearted, and conscientious man, and
Alexey Alexandrovitch was aware of his personal goodwill. But their
five years of official work together seemed to have put a barrier
between them that cut off warmer relations.

After signing the papers brought him, Alexey Alexandrovitch had sat for
a long while in silence, glancing at Mihail Vassilievitch, and several
times he attempted to speak, but could not. He had already prepared the
phrase: “You have heard of my trouble?” But he ended by saying, as
usual: “So you’ll get this ready for me?” and with that dismissed him.

The other person was the doctor, who had also a kindly feeling for him;
but there had long existed a taciturn understanding between them that
both were weighed down by work, and always in a hurry.

Of his women friends, foremost amongst them Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
Alexey Alexandrovitch never thought. All women, simply as women, were
terrible and distasteful to him.


Chapter 22

Alexey Alexandrovitch had forgotten the Countess Lidia Ivanovna, but
she had not forgotten him. At the bitterest moment of his lonely
despair she came to him, and without waiting to be announced, walked
straight into his study. She found him as he was sitting with his head
in both hands.

“_J’ai forcé la consigne_,” she said, walking in with rapid steps and
breathing hard with excitement and rapid exercise. “I have heard all!
Alexey Alexandrovitch! Dear friend!” she went on, warmly squeezing his
hand in both of hers and gazing with her fine pensive eyes into his.

Alexey Alexandrovitch, frowning, got up, and disengaging his hand,
moved her a chair.

“Won’t you sit down, countess? I’m seeing no one because I’m unwell,
countess,” he said, and his lips twitched.

“Dear friend!” repeated Countess Lidia Ivanovna, never taking her eyes
off his, and suddenly her eyebrows rose at the inner corners,
describing a triangle on her forehead, her ugly yellow face became
still uglier, but Alexey Alexandrovitch felt that she was sorry for him
and was preparing to cry. And he too was softened; he snatched her
plump hand and proceeded to kiss it.

“Dear friend!” she said in a voice breaking with emotion. “You ought
not to give way to grief. Your sorrow is a great one, but you ought to
find consolation.”

“I am crushed, I am annihilated, I am no longer a man!” said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, letting go her hand, but still gazing into her brimming
eyes. “My position is so awful because I can find nowhere, I cannot
find within me strength to support me.”

“You will find support; seek it—not in me, though I beseech you to
believe in my friendship,” she said, with a sigh. “Our support is love,
that love that He has vouchsafed us. His burden is light,” she said,
with the look of ecstasy Alexey Alexandrovitch knew so well. “He will
be your support and your succor.”

Although there was in these words a flavor of that sentimental emotion
at her own lofty feelings, and that new mystical fervor which had
lately gained ground in Petersburg, and which seemed to Alexey
Alexandrovitch disproportionate, still it was pleasant to him to hear
this now.

“I am weak. I am crushed. I foresaw nothing, and now I understand
nothing.”

“Dear friend,” repeated Lidia Ivanovna.

“It’s not the loss of what I have not now, it’s not that!” pursued
Alexey Alexandrovitch. “I do not grieve for that. But I cannot help
feeling humiliated before other people for the position I am placed in.
It is wrong, but I can’t help it, I can’t help it.”

“Not you it was performed that noble act of forgiveness, at which I was
moved to ecstasy, and everyone else too, but He, working within your
heart,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, raising her eyes rapturously,
“and so you cannot be ashamed of your act.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch knitted his brows, and crooking his hands, he
cracked his fingers.

“One must know all the facts,” he said in his thin voice. “A man’s
strength has its limits, countess, and I have reached my limits. The
whole day I have had to be making arrangements, arrangements about
household matters arising” (he emphasized the word _arising_) “from my
new, solitary position. The servants, the governess, the accounts....
These pinpricks have stabbed me to the heart, and I have not the
strength to bear it. At dinner ... yesterday, I was almost getting up
from the dinner-table. I could not bear the way my son looked at me. He
did not ask me the meaning of it all, but he wanted to ask, and I could
not bear the look in his eyes. He was afraid to look at me, but that is
not all....” Alexey Alexandrovitch would have referred to the bill that
had been brought him, but his voice shook, and he stopped. That bill on
blue paper, for a hat and ribbons, he could not recall without a rush
of self-pity.

“I understand, dear friend,” said Lidia Ivanovna. “I understand it all.
Succor and comfort you will find not in me, though I have come only to
aid you if I can. If I could take from off you all these petty,
humiliating cares ... I understand that a woman’s word, a woman’s
superintendence is needed. You will intrust it to me?”

Silently and gratefully Alexey Alexandrovitch pressed her hand.

“Together we will take care of Seryozha. Practical affairs are not my
strong point. But I will set to work. I will be your housekeeper. Don’t
thank me. I do it not from myself....”

“I cannot help thanking you.”

“But, dear friend, do not give way to the feeling of which you
spoke—being ashamed of what is the Christian’s highest glory: _he who
humbles himself shall be exalted_. And you cannot thank me. You must
thank Him, and pray to Him for succor. In Him alone we find peace,
consolation, salvation, and love,” she said, and turning her eyes
heavenwards, she began praying, as Alexey Alexandrovitch gathered from
her silence.

Alexey Alexandrovitch listened to her now, and those expressions which
had seemed to him, if not distasteful, at least exaggerated, now seemed
to him natural and consolatory. Alexey Alexandrovitch had disliked this
new enthusiastic fervor. He was a believer, who was interested in
religion primarily in its political aspect, and the new doctrine which
ventured upon several new interpretations, just because it paved the
way to discussion and analysis, was in principle disagreeable to him.
He had hitherto taken up a cold and even antagonistic attitude to this
new doctrine, and with Countess Lidia Ivanovna, who had been carried
away by it, he had never argued, but by silence had assiduously parried
her attempts to provoke him into argument. Now for the first time he
heard her words with pleasure, and did not inwardly oppose them.

“I am very, very grateful to you, both for your deeds and for your
words,” he said, when she had finished praying.

Countess Lidia Ivanovna once more pressed both her friend’s hands.

“Now I will enter upon my duties,” she said with a smile after a pause,
as she wiped away the traces of tears. “I am going to Seryozha. Only in
the last extremity shall I apply to you.” And she got up and went out.

Countess Lidia Ivanovna went into Seryozha’s part of the house, and
dropping tears on the scared child’s cheeks, she told him that his
father was a saint and his mother was dead.

Countess Lidia Ivanovna kept her promise. She did actually take upon
herself the care of the organization and management of Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s household. But she had not overstated the case when
saying that practical affairs were not her strong point. All her
arrangements had to be modified because they could not be carried out,
and they were modified by Korney, Alexey Alexandrovitch’s valet, who,
though no one was aware of the fact, now managed Karenin’s household,
and quietly and discreetly reported to his master while he was dressing
all it was necessary for him to know. But Lidia Ivanovna’s help was
none the less real; she gave Alexey Alexandrovitch moral support in the
consciousness of her love and respect for him, and still more, as it
was soothing to her to believe, in that she almost turned him to
Christianity—that is, from an indifferent and apathetic believer she
turned him into an ardent and steadfast adherent of the new
interpretation of Christian doctrine, which had been gaining ground of
late in Petersburg. It was easy for Alexey Alexandrovitch to believe in
this teaching. Alexey Alexandrovitch, like Lidia Ivanovna indeed, and
others who shared their views, was completely devoid of vividness of
imagination, that spiritual faculty in virtue of which the conceptions
evoked by the imagination become so vivid that they must needs be in
harmony with other conceptions, and with actual fact. He saw nothing
impossible and inconceivable in the idea that death, though existing
for unbelievers, did not exist for him, and that, as he was possessed
of the most perfect faith, of the measure of which he was himself the
judge, therefore there was no sin in his soul, and he was experiencing
complete salvation here on earth.

It is true that the erroneousness and shallowness of this conception of
his faith was dimly perceptible to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and he knew
that when, without the slightest idea that his forgiveness was the
action of a higher power, he had surrendered directly to the feeling of
forgiveness, he had felt more happiness than now when he was thinking
every instant that Christ was in his heart, and that in signing
official papers he was doing His will. But for Alexey Alexandrovitch it
was a necessity to think in that way; it was such a necessity for him
in his humiliation to have some elevated standpoint, however imaginary,
from which, looked down upon by all, he could look down on others, that
he clung, as to his one salvation, to his delusion of salvation.


Chapter 23

The Countess Lidia Ivanovna had, as a very young and sentimental girl,
been married to a wealthy man of high rank, an extremely good-natured,
jovial, and extremely dissipated rake. Two months after marriage her
husband abandoned her, and her impassioned protestations of affection
he met with a sarcasm and even hostility that people knowing the
count’s good heart, and seeing no defects in the sentimental Lidia,
were at a loss to explain. Though they were divorced and lived apart,
yet whenever the husband met the wife, he invariably behaved to her
with the same malignant irony, the cause of which was incomprehensible.

Countess Lidia Ivanovna had long given up being in love with her
husband, but from that time she had never given up being in love with
someone. She was in love with several people at once, both men and
women; she had been in love with almost everyone who had been
particularly distinguished in any way. She was in love with all the new
princes and princesses who married into the imperial family; she had
been in love with a high dignitary of the Church, a vicar, and a parish
priest; she had been in love with a journalist, three Slavophiles, with
Komissarov, with a minister, a doctor, an English missionary and
Karenin. All these passions constantly waning or growing more ardent,
did not prevent her from keeping up the most extended and complicated
relations with the court and fashionable society. But from the time
that after Karenin’s trouble she took him under her special protection,
from the time that she set to work in Karenin’s household looking after
his welfare, she felt that all her other attachments were not the real
thing, and that she was now genuinely in love, and with no one but
Karenin. The feeling she now experienced for him seemed to her stronger
than any of her former feelings. Analyzing her feeling, and comparing
it with former passions, she distinctly perceived that she would not
have been in love with Komissarov if he had not saved the life of the
Tsar, that she would not have been in love with Ristitch-Kudzhitsky if
there had been no Slavonic question, but that she loved Karenin for
himself, for his lofty, uncomprehended soul, for the sweet—to her—high
notes of his voice, for his drawling intonation, his weary eyes, his
character, and his soft white hands with their swollen veins. She was
not simply overjoyed at meeting him, but she sought in his face signs
of the impression she was making on him. She tried to please him, not
by her words only, but in her whole person. For his sake it was that
she now lavished more care on her dress than before. She caught herself
in reveries on what might have been, if she had not been married and he
had been free. She blushed with emotion when he came into the room, she
could not repress a smile of rapture when he said anything amiable to
her.

For several days now Countess Lidia Ivanovna had been in a state of
intense excitement. She had learned that Anna and Vronsky were in
Petersburg. Alexey Alexandrovitch must be saved from seeing her, he
must be saved even from the torturing knowledge that that awful woman
was in the same town with him, and that he might meet her any minute.

Lidia Ivanovna made inquiries through her friends as to what those
_infamous people_, as she called Anna and Vronsky, intended doing, and
she endeavored so to guide every movement of her friend during those
days that he could not come across them. The young adjutant, an
acquaintance of Vronsky, through whom she obtained her information, and
who hoped through Countess Lidia Ivanovna to obtain a concession, told
her that they had finished their business and were going away next day.
Lidia Ivanovna had already begun to calm down, when the next morning a
note was brought her, the handwriting of which she recognized with
horror. It was the handwriting of Anna Karenina. The envelope was of
paper as thick as bark; on the oblong yellow paper there was a huge
monogram, and the letter smelt of agreeable scent.

“Who brought it?”

“A commissionaire from the hotel.”

It was some time before Countess Lidia Ivanovna could sit down to read
the letter. Her excitement brought on an attack of asthma, to which she
was subject. When she had recovered her composure, she read the
following letter in French:





“Madame la Comtesse,

“The Christian feelings with which your heart is filled give me the, I
feel, unpardonable boldness to write to you. I am miserable at being
separated from my son. I entreat permission to see him once before my
departure. Forgive me for recalling myself to your memory. I apply to
you and not to Alexey Alexandrovitch, simply because I do not wish to
cause that generous man to suffer in remembering me. Knowing your
friendship for him, I know you will understand me. Could you send
Seryozha to me, or should I come to the house at some fixed hour, or
will you let me know when and where I could see him away from home? I
do not anticipate a refusal, knowing the magnanimity of him with whom
it rests. You cannot conceive the craving I have to see him, and so
cannot conceive the gratitude your help will arouse in me.

“Anna.”



Everything in this letter exasperated Countess Lidia Ivanovna: its
contents and the allusion to magnanimity, and especially its free and
easy—as she considered—tone.

“Say that there is no answer,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, and
immediately opening her blotting-book, she wrote to Alexey
Alexandrovitch that she hoped to see him at one o’clock at the levee.

“I must talk with you of a grave and painful subject. There we will
arrange where to meet. Best of all at my house, where I will order tea
_as you like it_. Urgent. He lays the cross, but He gives the strength
to bear it,” she added, so as to give him some slight preparation.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna usually wrote some two or three letters a day
to Alexey Alexandrovitch. She enjoyed that form of communication, which
gave opportunity for a refinement and air of mystery not afforded by
their personal interviews.


Chapter 24

The levee was drawing to a close. People met as they were going away,
and gossiped of the latest news, of the newly bestowed honors and the
changes in the positions of the higher functionaries.

“If only Countess Marya Borissovna were Minister of War, and Princess
Vatkovskaya were Commander-in-Chief,” said a gray-headed, little old
man in a gold-embroidered uniform, addressing a tall, handsome maid of
honor who had questioned him about the new appointments.

“And me among the adjutants,” said the maid of honor, smiling.

“You have an appointment already. You’re over the ecclesiastical
department. And your assistant’s Karenin.”

“Good-day, prince!” said the little old man to a man who came up to
him.

“What were you saying of Karenin?” said the prince.

“He and Putyatov have received the Alexander Nevsky.”

“I thought he had it already.”

“No. Just look at him,” said the little old man, pointing with his
embroidered hat to Karenin in a court uniform with the new red ribbon
across his shoulders, standing in the doorway of the hall with an
influential member of the Imperial Council. “Pleased and happy as a
brass farthing,” he added, stopping to shake hands with a handsome
gentleman of the bedchamber of colossal proportions.

“No; he’s looking older,” said the gentleman of the bedchamber.

“From overwork. He’s always drawing up projects nowadays. He won’t let
a poor devil go nowadays till he’s explained it all to him under
heads.”

“Looking older, did you say? _Il fait des passions_. I believe Countess
Lidia Ivanovna’s jealous now of his wife.”

“Oh, come now, please don’t say any harm of Countess Lidia Ivanovna.”

“Why, is there any harm in her being in love with Karenin?”

“But is it true Madame Karenina’s here?”

“Well, not here in the palace, but in Petersburg. I met her yesterday
with Alexey Vronsky, _bras dessous, bras dessous_, in the Morsky.”

“_C’est un homme qui n’a pas_,...” the gentleman of the bedchamber was
beginning, but he stopped to make room, bowing, for a member of the
Imperial family to pass.

Thus people talked incessantly of Alexey Alexandrovitch, finding fault
with him and laughing at him, while he, blocking up the way of the
member of the Imperial Council he had captured, was explaining to him
point by point his new financial project, never interrupting his
discourse for an instant for fear he should escape.

Almost at the same time that his wife left Alexey Alexandrovitch there
had come to him that bitterest moment in the life of an official—the
moment when his upward career comes to a full stop. This full stop had
arrived and everyone perceived it, but Alexey Alexandrovitch himself
was not yet aware that his career was over. Whether it was due to his
feud with Stremov, or his misfortune with his wife, or simply that
Alexey Alexandrovitch had reached his destined limits, it had become
evident to everyone in the course of that year that his career was at
an end. He still filled a position of consequence, he sat on many
commissions and committees, but he was a man whose day was over, and
from whom nothing was expected. Whatever he said, whatever he proposed,
was heard as though it were something long familiar, and the very thing
that was not needed. But Alexey Alexandrovitch was not aware of this,
and, on the contrary, being cut off from direct participation in
governmental activity, he saw more clearly than ever the errors and
defects in the action of others, and thought it his duty to point out
means for their correction. Shortly after his separation from his wife,
he began writing his first note on the new judicial procedure, the
first of the endless series of notes he was destined to write in the
future.

Alexey Alexandrovitch did not merely fail to observe his hopeless
position in the official world, he was not merely free from anxiety on
this head, he was positively more satisfied than ever with his own
activity.

“He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord,
how he may please the Lord: but he that is married careth for the
things that are of the world, how he may please his wife,” says the
Apostle Paul, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, who was now guided in every
action by Scripture, often recalled this text. It seemed to him that
ever since he had been left without a wife, he had in these very
projects of reform been serving the Lord more zealously than before.

The unmistakable impatience of the member of the Council trying to get
away from him did not trouble Alexey Alexandrovitch; he gave up his
exposition only when the member of the Council, seizing his chance when
one of the Imperial family was passing, slipped away from him.

Left alone, Alexey Alexandrovitch looked down, collecting his thoughts,
then looked casually about him and walked towards the door, where he
hoped to meet Countess Lidia Ivanovna.

“And how strong they all are, how sound physically,” thought Alexey
Alexandrovitch, looking at the powerfully built gentleman of the
bedchamber with his well-combed, perfumed whiskers, and at the red neck
of the prince, pinched by his tight uniform. He had to pass them on his
way. “Truly is it said that all the world is evil,” he thought, with
another sidelong glance at the calves of the gentleman of the
bedchamber.

Moving forward deliberately, Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed with his
customary air of weariness and dignity to the gentleman who had been
talking about him, and looking towards the door, his eyes sought
Countess Lidia Ivanovna.

“Ah! Alexey Alexandrovitch!” said the little old man, with a malicious
light in his eyes, at the moment when Karenin was on a level with them,
and was nodding with a frigid gesture, “I haven’t congratulated you
yet,” said the old man, pointing to his newly received ribbon.

“Thank you,” answered Alexey Alexandrovitch. “What an _exquisite_ day
today,” he added, laying emphasis in his peculiar way on the word
_exquisite_.

That they laughed at him he was well aware, but he did not expect
anything but hostility from them; he was used to that by now.

Catching sight of the yellow shoulders of Lidia Ivanovna jutting out
above her corset, and her fine pensive eyes bidding him to her, Alexey
Alexandrovitch smiled, revealing untarnished white teeth, and went
towards her.

Lidia Ivanovna’s dress had cost her great pains, as indeed all her
dresses had done of late. Her aim in dress was now quite the reverse of
that she had pursued thirty years before. Then her desire had been to
adorn herself with something, and the more adorned the better. Now, on
the contrary, she was perforce decked out in a way so inconsistent with
her age and her figure, that her one anxiety was to contrive that the
contrast between these adornments and her own exterior should not be
too appalling. And as far as Alexey Alexandrovitch was concerned she
succeeded, and was in his eyes attractive. For him she was the one
island not only of goodwill to him, but of love in the midst of the sea
of hostility and jeering that surrounded him.

Passing through rows of ironical eyes, he was drawn as naturally to her
loving glance as a plant to the sun.

“I congratulate you,” she said to him, her eyes on his ribbon.

Suppressing a smile of pleasure, he shrugged his shoulders, closing his
eyes, as though to say that that could not be a source of joy to him.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna was very well aware that it was one of his
chief sources of satisfaction, though he never admitted it.

“How is our angel?” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, meaning Seryozha.

“I can’t say I was quite pleased with him,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
raising his eyebrows and opening his eyes. “And Sitnikov is not
satisfied with him.” (Sitnikov was the tutor to whom Seryozha’s secular
education had been intrusted.) “As I have mentioned to you, there’s a
sort of coldness in him towards the most important questions which
ought to touch the heart of every man and every child....” Alexey
Alexandrovitch began expounding his views on the sole question that
interested him besides the service—the education of his son.

When Alexey Alexandrovitch with Lidia Ivanovna’s help had been brought
back anew to life and activity, he felt it his duty to undertake the
education of the son left on his hands. Having never before taken any
interest in educational questions, Alexey Alexandrovitch devoted some
time to the theoretical study of the subject. After reading several
books on anthropology, education, and didactics, Alexey Alexandrovitch
drew up a plan of education, and engaging the best tutor in Petersburg
to superintend it, he set to work, and the subject continually absorbed
him.

“Yes, but the heart. I see in him his father’s heart, and with such a
heart a child cannot go far wrong,” said Lidia Ivanovna with
enthusiasm.

“Yes, perhaps.... As for me, I do my duty. It’s all I can do.”

“You’re coming to me,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, after a pause; “we
have to speak of a subject painful for you. I would give anything to
have spared you certain memories, but others are not of the same mind.
I have received a letter from _her_. _She_ is here in Petersburg.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch shuddered at the allusion to his wife, but
immediately his face assumed the deathlike rigidity which expressed
utter helplessness in the matter.

“I was expecting it,” he said.

Countess Lidia Ivanovna looked at him ecstatically, and tears of
rapture at the greatness of his soul came into her eyes.


Chapter 25

When Alexey Alexandrovitch came into the Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s snug
little boudoir, decorated with old china and hung with portraits, the
lady herself had not yet made her appearance.

She was changing her dress.

A cloth was laid on a round table, and on it stood a china tea service
and a silver spirit-lamp and tea kettle. Alexey Alexandrovitch looked
idly about at the endless familiar portraits which adorned the room,
and sitting down to the table, he opened a New Testament lying upon it.
The rustle of the countess’s silk skirt drew his attention off.

“Well now, we can sit quietly,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, slipping
hurriedly with an agitated smile between the table and the sofa, “and
talk over our tea.”

After some words of preparation, Countess Lidia Ivanovna, breathing
hard and flushing crimson, gave into Alexey Alexandrovitch’s hands the
letter she had received.

After reading the letter, he sat a long while in silence.

“I don’t think I have the right to refuse her,” he said, timidly
lifting his eyes.

“Dear friend, you never see evil in anyone!”

“On the contrary, I see that all is evil. But whether it is just....”

His face showed irresolution, and a seeking for counsel, support, and
guidance in a matter he did not understand.

“No,” Countess Lidia Ivanovna interrupted him; “there are limits to
everything. I can understand immorality,” she said, not quite
truthfully, since she never could understand that which leads women to
immorality; “but I don’t understand cruelty: to whom? to you! How can
she stay in the town where you are? No, the longer one lives the more
one learns. And I’m learning to understand your loftiness and her
baseness.”

“Who is to throw a stone?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, unmistakably
pleased with the part he had to play. “I have forgiven all, and so I
cannot deprive her of what is exacted by love in her—by her love for
her son....”

“But is that love, my friend? Is it sincere? Admitting that you have
forgiven—that you forgive—have we the right to work on the feelings of
that angel? He looks on her as dead. He prays for her, and beseeches
God to have mercy on her sins. And it is better so. But now what will
he think?”

“I had not thought of that,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, evidently
agreeing.

Countess Lidia Ivanovna hid her face in her hands and was silent. She
was praying.

“If you ask my advice,” she said, having finished her prayer and
uncovered her face, “I do not advise you to do this. Do you suppose I
don’t see how you are suffering, how this has torn open your wounds?
But supposing that, as always, you don’t think of yourself, what can it
lead to?—to fresh suffering for you, to torture for the child. If there
were a trace of humanity left in her, she ought not to wish for it
herself. No, I have no hesitation in saying I advise not, and if you
will intrust it to me, I will write to her.”

And Alexey Alexandrovitch consented, and Countess Lidia Ivanovna sent
the following letter in French:


“Dear Madame,

“To be reminded of you might have results for your son in leading to
questions on his part which could not be answered without implanting in
the child’s soul a spirit of censure towards what should be for him
sacred, and therefore I beg you to interpret your husband’s refusal in
the spirit of Christian love. I pray to Almighty God to have mercy on
you.

“Countess Lidia.”


This letter attained the secret object which Countess Lidia Ivanovna
had concealed from herself. It wounded Anna to the quick.

For his part, Alexey Alexandrovitch, on returning home from Lidia
Ivanovna’s, could not all that day concentrate himself on his usual
pursuits, and find that spiritual peace of one saved and believing
which he had felt of late.

The thought of his wife, who had so greatly sinned against him, and
towards whom he had been so saintly, as Countess Lidia Ivanovna had so
justly told him, ought not to have troubled him; but he was not easy;
he could not understand the book he was reading; he could not drive
away harassing recollections of his relations with her, of the mistake
which, as it now seemed, he had made in regard to her. The memory of
how he had received her confession of infidelity on their way home from
the races (especially that he had insisted only on the observance of
external decorum, and had not sent a challenge) tortured him like a
remorse. He was tortured too by the thought of the letter he had
written her; and most of all, his forgiveness, which nobody wanted, and
his care of the other man’s child made his heart burn with shame and
remorse.

And just the same feeling of shame and regret he felt now, as he
reviewed all his past with her, recalling the awkward words in which,
after long wavering, he had made her an offer.

“But how have I been to blame?” he said to himself. And this question
always excited another question in him—whether they felt differently,
did their loving and marrying differently, these Vronskys and Oblonskys
... these gentlemen of the bedchamber, with their fine calves. And
there passed before his mind a whole series of these mettlesome,
vigorous, self-confident men, who always and everywhere drew his
inquisitive attention in spite of himself. He tried to dispel these
thoughts, he tried to persuade himself that he was not living for this
transient life, but for the life of eternity, and that there was peace
and love in his heart.

But the fact that he had in this transient, trivial life made, as it
seemed to him, a few trivial mistakes tortured him as though the
eternal salvation in which he believed had no existence. But this
temptation did not last long, and soon there was reestablished once
more in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s soul the peace and the elevation by
virtue of which he could forget what he did not want to remember.


Chapter 26

“Well, Kapitonitch?” said Seryozha, coming back rosy and good-humored
from his walk the day before his birthday, and giving his overcoat to
the tall old hall-porter, who smiled down at the little person from the
height of his long figure. “Well, has the bandaged clerk been here
today? Did papa see him?”

“He saw him. The minute the chief secretary came out, I announced him,”
said the hall-porter with a good-humored wink. “Here, I’ll take it
off.”

“Seryozha!” said the tutor, stopping in the doorway leading to the
inner rooms. “Take it off yourself.” But Seryozha, though he heard his
tutor’s feeble voice, did not pay attention to it. He stood keeping
hold of the hall-porter’s belt, and gazing into his face.

“Well, and did papa do what he wanted for him?”

The hall-porter nodded his head affirmatively. The clerk with his face
tied up, who had already been seven times to ask some favor of Alexey
Alexandrovitch, interested both Seryozha and the hall-porter. Seryozha
had come upon him in the hall, and had heard him plaintively beg the
hall-porter to announce him, saying that he and his children had death
staring them in the face.

Since then Seryozha, having met him a second time in the hall, took
great interest in him.

“Well, was he very glad?” he asked.

“Glad? I should think so! Almost dancing as he walked away.”

“And has anything been left?” asked Seryozha, after a pause.

“Come, sir,” said the hall-porter; then with a shake of his head he
whispered, “Something from the countess.”

Seryozha understood at once that what the hall-porter was speaking of
was a present from Countess Lidia Ivanovna for his birthday.

“What do you say? Where?”

“Korney took it to your papa. A fine plaything it must be too!”

“How big? Like this?”

“Rather small, but a fine thing.”

“A book.”

“No, a thing. Run along, run along, Vassily Lukitch is calling you,”
said the porter, hearing the tutor’s steps approaching, and carefully
taking away from his belt the little hand in the glove half pulled off,
he signed with his head towards the tutor.

“Vassily Lukitch, in a tiny minute!” answered Seryozha with that gay
and loving smile which always won over the conscientious Vassily
Lukitch.

Seryozha was too happy, everything was too delightful for him to be
able to help sharing with his friend the porter the family good fortune
of which he had heard during his walk in the public gardens from Lidia
Ivanovna’s niece. This piece of good news seemed to him particularly
important from its coming at the same time with the gladness of the
bandaged clerk and his own gladness at toys having come for him. It
seemed to Seryozha that this was a day on which everyone ought to be
glad and happy.

“You know papa’s received the Alexander Nevsky today?”

“To be sure I do! People have been already to congratulate him.”

“And is he glad?”

“Glad at the Tsar’s gracious favor! I should think so! It’s a proof
he’s deserved it,” said the porter severely and seriously.

Seryozha fell to dreaming, gazing up at the face of the porter, which
he had thoroughly studied in every detail, especially the chin that
hung down between the gray whiskers, never seen by anyone but Seryozha,
who saw him only from below.

“Well, and has your daughter been to see you lately?”

The porter’s daughter was a ballet dancer.

“When is she to come on week-days? They’ve their lessons to learn too.
And you’ve your lesson, sir; run along.”

On coming into the room, Seryozha, instead of sitting down to his
lessons, told his tutor of his supposition that what had been brought
him must be a machine. “What do you think?” he inquired.

But Vassily Lukitch was thinking of nothing but the necessity of
learning the grammar lesson for the teacher, who was coming at two.

“No, do just tell me, Vassily Lukitch,” he asked suddenly, when he was
seated at their work table with the book in his hands, “what is greater
than the Alexander Nevsky? You know papa’s received the Alexander
Nevsky?”

Vassily Lukitch replied that the Vladimir was greater than the
Alexander Nevsky.

“And higher still?”

“Well, highest of all is the Andrey Pervozvanny.”

“And higher than the Andrey?”

“I don’t know.”

“What, you don’t know?” and Seryozha, leaning on his elbows, sank into
deep meditation.

His meditations were of the most complex and diverse character. He
imagined his father’s having suddenly been presented with both the
Vladimir and the Andrey today, and in consequence being much better
tempered at his lesson, and dreamed how, when he was grown up, he would
himself receive all the orders, and what they might invent higher than
the Andrey. Directly any higher order were invented, he would win it.
They would make a higher one still, and he would immediately win that
too.

The time passed in such meditations, and when the teacher came, the
lesson about the adverbs of place and time and manner of action was not
ready, and the teacher was not only displeased, but hurt. This touched
Seryozha. He felt he was not to blame for not having learned the
lesson; however much he tried, he was utterly unable to do that. As
long as the teacher was explaining to him, he believed him and seemed
to comprehend, but as soon as he was left alone, he was positively
unable to recollect and to understand that the short and familiar word
“suddenly” is an adverb of manner of action. Still he was sorry that he
had disappointed the teacher.

He chose a moment when the teacher was looking in silence at the book.

“Mihail Ivanitch, when is your birthday?” he asked all, of a sudden.

“You’d much better be thinking about your work. Birthdays are of no
importance to a rational being. It’s a day like any other on which one
has to do one’s work.”

Seryozha looked intently at the teacher, at his scanty beard, at his
spectacles, which had slipped down below the ridge on his nose, and
fell into so deep a reverie that he heard nothing of what the teacher
was explaining to him. He knew that the teacher did not think what he
said; he felt it from the tone in which it was said. “But why have they
all agreed to speak just in the same manner always the dreariest and
most useless stuff? Why does he keep me off; why doesn’t he love me?”
he asked himself mournfully, and could not think of an answer.


Chapter 27

After the lesson with the grammar teacher came his father’s lesson.
While waiting for his father, Seryozha sat at the table playing with a
penknife, and fell to dreaming. Among Seryozha’s favorite occupations
was searching for his mother during his walks. He did not believe in
death generally, and in her death in particular, in spite of what Lidia
Ivanovna had told him and his father had confirmed, and it was just
because of that, and after he had been told she was dead, that he had
begun looking for her when out for a walk. Every woman of full,
graceful figure with dark hair was his mother. At the sight of such a
woman such a feeling of tenderness was stirred within him that his
breath failed him, and tears came into his eyes. And he was on the
tiptoe of expectation that she would come up to him, would lift her
veil. All her face would be visible, she would smile, she would hug
him, he would sniff her fragrance, feel the softness of her arms, and
cry with happiness, just as he had one evening lain on her lap while
she tickled him, and he laughed and bit her white, ring-covered
fingers. Later, when he accidentally learned from his old nurse that
his mother was not dead, and his father and Lidia Ivanovna had
explained to him that she was dead to him because she was wicked (which
he could not possibly believe, because he loved her), he went on
seeking her and expecting her in the same way. That day in the public
gardens there had been a lady in a lilac veil, whom he had watched with
a throbbing heart, believing it to be she as she came towards them
along the path. The lady had not come up to them, but had disappeared
somewhere. That day, more intensely than ever, Seryozha felt a rush of
love for her, and now, waiting for his father, he forgot everything,
and cut all round the edge of the table with his penknife, staring
straight before him with sparkling eyes and dreaming of her.

“Here is your papa!” said Vassily Lukitch, rousing him.

Seryozha jumped up and went up to his father, and kissing his hand,
looked at him intently, trying to discover signs of his joy at
receiving the Alexander Nevsky.

“Did you have a nice walk?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, sitting down in
his easy chair, pulling the volume of the Old Testament to him and
opening it. Although Alexey Alexandrovitch had more than once told
Seryozha that every Christian ought to know Scripture history
thoroughly, he often referred to the Bible himself during the lesson,
and Seryozha observed this.

“Yes, it was very nice indeed, papa,” said Seryozha, sitting sideways
on his chair and rocking it, which was forbidden. “I saw Nadinka”
(Nadinka was a niece of Lidia Ivanovna’s who was being brought up in
her house). “She told me you’d been given a new star. Are you glad,
papa?”

“First of all, don’t rock your chair, please,” said Alexey
Alexandrovitch. “And secondly, it’s not the reward that’s precious, but
the work itself. And I could have wished you understood that. If you
now are going to work, to study in order to win a reward, then the work
will seem hard to you; but when you work” (Alexey Alexandrovitch, as he
spoke, thought of how he had been sustained by a sense of duty through
the wearisome labor of the morning, consisting of signing one hundred
and eighty papers), “loving your work, you will find your reward in
it.”

Seryozha’s eyes, that had been shining with gaiety and tenderness, grew
dull and dropped before his father’s gaze. This was the same
long-familiar tone his father always took with him, and Seryozha had
learned by now to fall in with it. His father always talked to him—so
Seryozha felt—as though he were addressing some boy of his own
imagination, one of those boys that exist in books, utterly unlike
himself. And Seryozha always tried with his father to act being the
story-book boy.

“You understand that, I hope?” said his father.

“Yes, papa,” answered Seryozha, acting the part of the imaginary boy.

The lesson consisted of learning by heart several verses out of the
Gospel and the repetition of the beginning of the Old Testament. The
verses from the Gospel Seryozha knew fairly well, but at the moment
when he was saying them he became so absorbed in watching the sharply
protruding, bony knobbiness of his father’s forehead, that he lost the
thread, and he transposed the end of one verse and the beginning of
another. So it was evident to Alexey Alexandrovitch that he did not
understand what he was saying, and that irritated him.

He frowned, and began explaining what Seryozha had heard many times
before and never could remember, because he understood it too well,
just as that “suddenly” is an adverb of manner of action. Seryozha
looked with scared eyes at his father, and could think of nothing but
whether his father would make him repeat what he had said, as he
sometimes did. And this thought so alarmed Seryozha that he now
understood nothing. But his father did not make him repeat it, and
passed on to the lesson out of the Old Testament. Seryozha recounted
the events themselves well enough, but when he had to answer questions
as to what certain events prefigured, he knew nothing, though he had
already been punished over this lesson. The passage at which he was
utterly unable to say anything, and began fidgeting and cutting the
table and swinging his chair, was where he had to repeat the patriarchs
before the Flood. He did not know one of them, except Enoch, who had
been taken up alive to heaven. Last time he had remembered their names,
but now he had forgotten them utterly, chiefly because Enoch was the
personage he liked best in the whole of the Old Testament, and Enoch’s
translation to heaven was connected in his mind with a whole long train
of thought, in which he became absorbed now while he gazed with
fascinated eyes at his father’s watch-chain and a half-unbuttoned
button on his waistcoat.

In death, of which they talked to him so often, Seryozha disbelieved
entirely. He did not believe that those he loved could die, above all
that he himself would die. That was to him something utterly
inconceivable and impossible. But he had been told that all men die; he
had asked people, indeed, whom he trusted, and they too, had confirmed
it; his old nurse, too, said the same, though reluctantly. But Enoch
had not died, and so it followed that everyone did not die. “And why
cannot anyone else so serve God and be taken alive to heaven?” thought
Seryozha. Bad people, that is those Seryozha did not like, they might
die, but the good might all be like Enoch.

“Well, what are the names of the patriarchs?”

“Enoch, Enos—”

“But you have said that already. This is bad, Seryozha, very bad. If
you don’t try to learn what is more necessary than anything for a
Christian,” said his father, getting up, “whatever can interest you? I
am displeased with you, and Piotr Ignatitch” (this was the most
important of his teachers) “is displeased with you.... I shall have to
punish you.”

His father and his teacher were both displeased with Seryozha, and he
certainly did learn his lessons very badly. But still it could not be
said he was a stupid boy. On the contrary, he was far cleverer than the
boys his teacher held up as examples to Seryozha. In his father’s
opinion, he did not want to learn what he was taught. In reality he
could not learn that. He could not, because the claims of his own soul
were more binding on him than those claims his father and his teacher
made upon him. Those claims were in opposition, and he was in direct
conflict with his education. He was nine years old; he was a child; but
he knew his own soul, it was precious to him, he guarded it as the
eyelid guards the eye, and without the key of love he let no one into
his soul. His teachers complained that he would not learn, while his
soul was brimming over with thirst for knowledge. And he learned from
Kapitonitch, from his nurse, from Nadinka, from Vassily Lukitch, but
not from his teachers. The spring his father and his teachers reckoned
upon to turn their mill-wheels had long dried up at the source, but its
waters did their work in another channel.

His father punished Seryozha by not letting him go to see Nadinka,
Lidia Ivanovna’s niece; but this punishment turned out happily for
Seryozha. Vassily Lukitch was in a good humor, and showed him how to
make windmills. The whole evening passed over this work and in dreaming
how to make a windmill on which he could turn himself—clutching at the
sails or tying himself on and whirling round. Of his mother Seryozha
did not think all the evening, but when he had gone to bed, he suddenly
remembered her, and prayed in his own words that his mother tomorrow
for his birthday might leave off hiding herself and come to him.

“Vassily Lukitch, do you know what I prayed for tonight extra besides
the regular things?”

“That you might learn your lessons better?”

“No.”

“Toys?”

“No. You’ll never guess. A splendid thing; but it’s a secret! When it
comes to pass I’ll tell you. Can’t you guess!”

“No, I can’t guess. You tell me,” said Vassily Lukitch with a smile,
which was rare with him. “Come, lie down, I’m putting out the candle.”

“Without the candle I can see better what I see and what I prayed for.
There! I was almost telling the secret!” said Seryozha, laughing gaily.

When the candle was taken away, Seryozha heard and felt his mother. She
stood over him, and with loving eyes caressed him. But then came
windmills, a knife, everything began to be mixed up, and he fell
asleep.


Chapter 28

On arriving in Petersburg, Vronsky and Anna stayed at one of the best
hotels; Vronsky apart in a lower story, Anna above with her child, its
nurse, and her maid, in a large suite of four rooms.

On the day of his arrival Vronsky went to his brother’s. There he found
his mother, who had come from Moscow on business. His mother and
sister-in-law greeted him as usual: they asked him about his stay
abroad, and talked of their common acquaintances, but did not let drop
a single word in allusion to his connection with Anna. His brother came
the next morning to see Vronsky, and of his own accord asked him about
her, and Alexey Vronsky told him directly that he looked upon his
connection with Madame Karenina as marriage; that he hoped to arrange a
divorce, and then to marry her, and until then he considered her as
much a wife as any other wife, and he begged him to tell their mother
and his wife so.

“If the world disapproves, I don’t care,” said Vronsky; “but if my
relations want to be on terms of relationship with me, they will have
to be on the same terms with my wife.”

The elder brother, who had always a respect for his younger brother’s
judgment, could not well tell whether he was right or not till the
world had decided the question; for his part he had nothing against it,
and with Alexey he went up to see Anna.

Before his brother, as before everyone, Vronsky addressed Anna with a
certain formality, treating her as he might a very intimate friend, but
it was understood that his brother knew their real relations, and they
talked about Anna’s going to Vronsky’s estate.

In spite of all his social experience Vronsky was, in consequence of
the new position in which he was placed, laboring under a strange
misapprehension. One would have thought he must have understood that
society was closed for him and Anna; but now some vague ideas had
sprung up in his brain that this was only the case in old-fashioned
days, and that now with the rapidity of modern progress (he had
unconsciously become by now a partisan of every sort of progress) the
views of society had changed, and that the question whether they would
be received in society was not a foregone conclusion. “Of course,” he
thought, “she would not be received at court, but intimate friends can
and must look at it in the proper light.” One may sit for several hours
at a stretch with one’s legs crossed in the same position, if one knows
that there’s nothing to prevent one’s changing one’s position; but if a
man knows that he must remain sitting so with crossed legs, then cramps
come on, the legs begin to twitch and to strain towards the spot to
which one would like to draw them. This was what Vronsky was
experiencing in regard to the world. Though at the bottom of his heart
he knew that the world was shut on them, he put it to the test whether
the world had not changed by now and would not receive them. But he
very quickly perceived that though the world was open for him
personally, it was closed for Anna. Just as in the game of cat and
mouse, the hands raised for him were dropped to bar the way for Anna.

One of the first ladies of Petersburg society whom Vronsky saw was his
cousin Betsy.

“At last!” she greeted him joyfully. “And Anna? How glad I am! Where
are you stopping? I can fancy after your delightful travels you must
find our poor Petersburg horrid. I can fancy your honeymoon in Rome.
How about the divorce? Is that all over?”

Vronsky noticed that Betsy’s enthusiasm waned when she learned that no
divorce had as yet taken place.

“People will throw stones at me, I know,” she said, “but I shall come
and see Anna; yes, I shall certainly come. You won’t be here long, I
suppose?”

And she did certainly come to see Anna the same day, but her tone was
not at all the same as in former days. She unmistakably prided herself
on her courage, and wished Anna to appreciate the fidelity of her
friendship. She only stayed ten minutes, talking of society gossip, and
on leaving she said:

“You’ve never told me when the divorce is to be? Supposing I’m ready to
fling my cap over the mill, other starchy people will give you the cold
shoulder until you’re married. And that’s so simple nowadays. _Ça se
fait_. So you’re going on Friday? Sorry we shan’t see each other
again.”

From Betsy’s tone Vronsky might have grasped what he had to expect from
the world; but he made another effort in his own family. His mother he
did not reckon upon. He knew that his mother, who had been so
enthusiastic over Anna at their first acquaintance, would have no mercy
on her now for having ruined her son’s career. But he had more hope of
Varya, his brother’s wife. He fancied she would not throw stones, and
would go simply and directly to see Anna, and would receive her in her
own house.

The day after his arrival Vronsky went to her, and finding her alone,
expressed his wishes directly.

“You know, Alexey,” she said after hearing him, “how fond I am of you,
and how ready I am to do anything for you; but I have not spoken,
because I knew I could be of no use to you and to Anna Arkadyevna,” she
said, articulating the name “Anna Arkadyevna” with particular care.
“Don’t suppose, please, that I judge her. Never; perhaps in her place I
should have done the same. I don’t and can’t enter into that,” she
said, glancing timidly at his gloomy face. “But one must call things by
their names. You want me to go and see her, to ask her here, and to
rehabilitate her in society; but do understand that _I cannot_ do so. I
have daughters growing up, and I must live in the world for my
husband’s sake. Well, I’m ready to come and see Anna Arkadyevna: she
will understand that I can’t ask her here, or I should have to do so in
such a way that she would not meet people who look at things
differently; that would offend her. I can’t raise her....”

“Oh, I don’t regard her as fallen more than hundreds of women you do
receive!” Vronsky interrupted her still more gloomily, and he got up in
silence, understanding that his sister-in-law’s decision was not to be
shaken.

“Alexey! don’t be angry with me. Please understand that I’m not to
blame,” began Varya, looking at him with a timid smile.

“I’m not angry with you,” he said still as gloomily; “but I’m sorry in
two ways. I’m sorry, too, that this means breaking up our friendship—if
not breaking up, at least weakening it. You will understand that for
me, too, it cannot be otherwise.”

And with that he left her.

Vronsky knew that further efforts were useless, and that he had to
spend these few days in Petersburg as though in a strange town,
avoiding every sort of relation with his own old circle in order not to
be exposed to the annoyances and humiliations which were so intolerable
to him. One of the most unpleasant features of his position in
Petersburg was that Alexey Alexandrovitch and his name seemed to meet
him everywhere. He could not begin to talk of anything without the
conversation turning on Alexey Alexandrovitch; he could not go anywhere
without risk of meeting him. So at least it seemed to Vronsky, just as
it seems to a man with a sore finger that he is continually, as though
on purpose, grazing his sore finger on everything.

Their stay in Petersburg was the more painful to Vronsky that he
perceived all the time a sort of new mood that he could not understand
in Anna. At one time she would seem in love with him, and then she
would become cold, irritable, and impenetrable. She was worrying over
something, and keeping something back from him, and did not seem to
notice the humiliations which poisoned his existence, and for her, with
her delicate intuition, must have been still more unbearable.


Chapter 29

One of Anna’s objects in coming back to Russia had been to see her son.
From the day she left Italy the thought of it had never ceased to
agitate her. And as she got nearer to Petersburg, the delight and
importance of this meeting grew ever greater in her imagination. She
did not even put to herself the question how to arrange it. It seemed
to her natural and simple to see her son when she should be in the same
town with him. But on her arrival in Petersburg she was suddenly made
distinctly aware of her present position in society, and she grasped
the fact that to arrange this meeting was no easy matter.

She had now been two days in Petersburg. The thought of her son never
left her for a single instant, but she had not yet seen him. To go
straight to the house, where she might meet Alexey Alexandrovitch, that
she felt she had no right to do. She might be refused admittance and
insulted. To write and so enter into relations with her husband—that it
made her miserable to think of doing; she could only be at peace when
she did not think of her husband. To get a glimpse of her son out
walking, finding out where and when he went out, was not enough for
her; she had so looked forward to this meeting, she had so much she
must say to him, she so longed to embrace him, to kiss him. Seryozha’s
old nurse might be a help to her and show her what to do. But the nurse
was not now living in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s house. In this
uncertainty, and in efforts to find the nurse, two days had slipped by.

Hearing of the close intimacy between Alexey Alexandrovitch and
Countess Lidia Ivanovna, Anna decided on the third day to write to her
a letter, which cost her great pains, and in which she intentionally
said that permission to see her son must depend on her husband’s
generosity. She knew that if the letter were shown to her husband, he
would keep up his character of magnanimity, and would not refuse her
request.

The commissionaire who took the letter had brought her back the most
cruel and unexpected answer, that there was no answer. She had never
felt so humiliated as at the moment when, sending for the
commissionaire, she heard from him the exact account of how he had
waited, and how afterwards he had been told there was no answer. Anna
felt humiliated, insulted, but she saw that from her point of view
Countess Lidia Ivanovna was right. Her suffering was the more poignant
that she had to bear it in solitude. She could not and would not share
it with Vronsky. She knew that to him, although he was the primary
cause of her distress, the question of her seeing her son would seem a
matter of very little consequence. She knew that he would never be
capable of understanding all the depth of her suffering, that for his
cool tone at any allusion to it she would begin to hate him. And she
dreaded that more than anything in the world, and so she hid from him
everything that related to her son. Spending the whole day at home she
considered ways of seeing her son, and had reached a decision to write
to her husband. She was just composing this letter when she was handed
the letter from Lidia Ivanovna. The countess’s silence had subdued and
depressed her, but the letter, all that she read between the lines in
it, so exasperated her, this malice was so revolting beside her
passionate, legitimate tenderness for her son, that she turned against
other people and left off blaming herself.

“This coldness—this pretense of feeling!” she said to herself. “They
must needs insult me and torture the child, and I am to submit to it!
Not on any consideration! She is worse than I am. I don’t lie, anyway.”
And she decided on the spot that next day, Seryozha’s birthday, she
would go straight to her husband’s house, bribe or deceive the
servants, but at any cost see her son and overturn the hideous
deception with which they were encompassing the unhappy child.

She went to a toy shop, bought toys and thought over a plan of action.
She would go early in the morning at eight o’clock, when Alexey
Alexandrovitch would be certain not to be up. She would have money in
her hand to give the hall-porter and the footman, so that they should
let her in, and not raising her veil, she would say that she had come
from Seryozha’s godfather to congratulate him, and that she had been
charged to leave the toys at his bedside. She had prepared everything
but the words she should say to her son. Often as she had dreamed of
it, she could never think of anything.

The next day, at eight o’clock in the morning, Anna got out of a hired
sledge and rang at the front entrance of her former home.

“Run and see what’s wanted. Some lady,” said Kapitonitch, who, not yet
dressed, in his overcoat and galoshes, had peeped out of the window and
seen a lady in a veil standing close up to the door. His assistant, a
lad Anna did not know, had no sooner opened the door to her than she
came in, and pulling a three-rouble note out of her muff put it
hurriedly into his hand.

“Seryozha—Sergey Alexeitch,” she said, and was going on. Scrutinizing
the note, the porter’s assistant stopped her at the second glass door.

“Whom do you want?” he asked.

She did not hear his words and made no answer.

Noticing the embarrassment of the unknown lady, Kapitonitch went out to
her, opened the second door for her, and asked her what she was pleased
to want.

“From Prince Skorodumov for Sergey Alexeitch,” she said.

“His honor’s not up yet,” said the porter, looking at her attentively.

Anna had not anticipated that the absolutely unchanged hall of the
house where she had lived for nine years would so greatly affect her.
Memories sweet and painful rose one after another in her heart, and for
a moment she forgot what she was here for.

“Would you kindly wait?” said Kapitonitch, taking off her fur cloak.

As he took off the cloak, Kapitonitch glanced at her face, recognized
her, and made her a low bow in silence.

“Please walk in, your excellency,” he said to her.

She tried to say something, but her voice refused to utter any sound;
with a guilty and imploring glance at the old man she went with light,
swift steps up the stairs. Bent double, and his galoshes catching in
the steps, Kapitonitch ran after her, trying to overtake her.

“The tutor’s there; maybe he’s not dressed. I’ll let him know.”

Anna still mounted the familiar staircase, not understanding what the
old man was saying.

“This way, to the left, if you please. Excuse its not being tidy. His
honor’s in the old parlor now,” the hall-porter said, panting. “Excuse
me, wait a little, your excellency; I’ll just see,” he said, and
overtaking her, he opened the high door and disappeared behind it. Anna
stood still waiting. “He’s only just awake,” said the hall-porter,
coming out. And at the very instant the porter said this, Anna caught
the sound of a childish yawn. From the sound of this yawn alone she
knew her son and seemed to see him living before her eyes.

“Let me in; go away!” she said, and went in through the high doorway.
On the right of the door stood a bed, and sitting up in the bed was the
boy. His little body bent forward with his nightshirt unbuttoned, he
was stretching and still yawning. The instant his lips came together
they curved into a blissfully sleepy smile, and with that smile he
slowly and deliciously rolled back again.

“Seryozha!” she whispered, going noiselessly up to him.

When she was parted from him, and all this latter time when she had
been feeling a fresh rush of love for him, she had pictured him as he
was at four years old, when she had loved him most of all. Now he was
not even the same as when she had left him; he was still further from
the four-year-old baby, more grown and thinner. How thin his face was,
how short his hair was! What long hands! How he had changed since she
left him! But it was he with his head, his lips, his soft neck and
broad little shoulders.

“Seryozha!” she repeated just in the child’s ear.

He raised himself again on his elbow, turned his tangled head from side
to side as though looking for something, and opened his eyes. Slowly
and inquiringly he looked for several seconds at his mother standing
motionless before him, then all at once he smiled a blissful smile, and
shutting his eyes, rolled not backwards but towards her into her arms.

“Seryozha! my darling boy!” she said, breathing hard and putting her
arms round his plump little body. “Mother!” he said, wriggling about in
her arms so as to touch her hands with different parts of him.

Smiling sleepily still with closed eyes, he flung fat little arms round
her shoulders, rolled towards her, with the delicious sleepy warmth and
fragrance that is only found in children, and began rubbing his face
against her neck and shoulders.

“I know,” he said, opening his eyes; “it’s my birthday today. I knew
you’d come. I’ll get up directly.”

And saying that he dropped asleep.

Anna looked at him hungrily; she saw how he had grown and changed in
her absence. She knew, and did not know, the bare legs so long now,
that were thrust out below the quilt, those short-cropped curls on his
neck in which she had so often kissed him. She touched all this and
could say nothing; tears choked her.

“What are you crying for, mother?” he said, waking completely up.
“Mother, what are you crying for?” he cried in a tearful voice.

“I won’t cry ... I’m crying for joy. It’s so long since I’ve seen you.
I won’t, I won’t,” she said, gulping down her tears and turning away.
“Come, it’s time for you to dress now,” she added, after a pause, and,
never letting go his hands, she sat down by his bedside on the chair,
where his clothes were put ready for him.

“How do you dress without me? How....” she tried to begin talking
simply and cheerfully, but she could not, and again she turned away.

“I don’t have a cold bath, papa didn’t order it. And you’ve not seen
Vassily Lukitch? He’ll come in soon. Why, you’re sitting on my
clothes!”

And Seryozha went off into a peal of laughter. She looked at him and
smiled.

“Mother, darling, sweet one!” he shouted, flinging himself on her again
and hugging her. It was as though only now, on seeing her smile, he
fully grasped what had happened.

“I don’t want that on,” he said, taking off her hat. And as it were,
seeing her afresh without her hat, he fell to kissing her again.

“But what did you think about me? You didn’t think I was dead?”

“I never believed it.”

“You didn’t believe it, my sweet?”

“I knew, I knew!” he repeated his favorite phrase, and snatching the
hand that was stroking his hair, he pressed the open palm to his mouth
and kissed it.


Chapter 30

Meanwhile Vassily Lukitch had not at first understood who this lady
was, and had learned from their conversation that it was no other
person than the mother who had left her husband, and whom he had not
seen, as he had entered the house after her departure. He was in doubt
whether to go in or not, or whether to communicate with Alexey
Alexandrovitch. Reflecting finally that his duty was to get Seryozha up
at the hour fixed, and that it was therefore not his business to
consider who was there, the mother or anyone else, but simply to do his
duty, he finished dressing, went to the door and opened it.

But the embraces of the mother and child, the sound of their voices,
and what they were saying, made him change his mind.

He shook his head, and with a sigh he closed the door. “I’ll wait
another ten minutes,” he said to himself, clearing his throat and
wiping away tears.

Among the servants of the household there was intense excitement all
this time. All had heard that their mistress had come, and that
Kapitonitch had let her in, and that she was even now in the nursery,
and that their master always went in person to the nursery at nine
o’clock, and everyone fully comprehended that it was impossible for the
husband and wife to meet, and that they must prevent it. Korney, the
valet, going down to the hall-porter’s room, asked who had let her in,
and how it was he had done so, and ascertaining that Kapitonitch had
admitted her and shown her up, he gave the old man a talking-to. The
hall-porter was doggedly silent, but when Korney told him he ought to
be sent away, Kapitonitch darted up to him, and waving his hands in
Korney’s face, began:

“Oh yes, to be sure you’d not have let her in! After ten years’
service, and never a word but of kindness, and there you’d up and say,
‘Be off, go along, get away with you!’ Oh yes, you’re a shrewd one at
politics, I dare say! You don’t need to be taught how to swindle the
master, and to filch fur coats!”

“Soldier!” said Korney contemptuously, and he turned to the nurse who
was coming in. “Here, what do you think, Marya Efimovna: he let her in
without a word to anyone,” Korney said addressing her. “Alexey
Alexandrovitch will be down immediately—and go into the nursery!”

“A pretty business, a pretty business!” said the nurse. “You, Korney
Vassilievitch, you’d best keep him some way or other, the master, while
I’ll run and get her away somehow. A pretty business!”

When the nurse went into the nursery, Seryozha was telling his mother
how he and Nadinka had had a fall in sledging downhill, and had turned
over three times. She was listening to the sound of his voice, watching
his face and the play of expression on it, touching his hand, but she
did not follow what he was saying. She must go, she must leave
him,—this was the only thing she was thinking and feeling. She heard
the steps of Vassily Lukitch coming up to the door and coughing; she
heard, too, the steps of the nurse as she came near; but she sat like
one turned to stone, incapable of beginning to speak or to get up.

“Mistress, darling!” began the nurse, going up to Anna and kissing her
hands and shoulders. “God has brought joy indeed to our boy on his
birthday. You aren’t changed one bit.”

“Oh, nurse dear, I didn’t know you were in the house,” said Anna,
rousing herself for a moment.

“I’m not living here, I’m living with my daughter. I came for the
birthday, Anna Arkadyevna, darling!”

The nurse suddenly burst into tears, and began kissing her hand again.

Seryozha, with radiant eyes and smiles, holding his mother by one hand
and his nurse by the other, pattered on the rug with his fat little
bare feet. The tenderness shown by his beloved nurse to his mother
threw him into an ecstasy.

“Mother! She often comes to see me, and when she comes....” he was
beginning, but he stopped, noticing that the nurse was saying something
in a whisper to his mother, and that in his mother’s face there was a
look of dread and something like shame, which was so strangely
unbecoming to her.

She went up to him.

“My sweet!” she said.

She could not say _good-bye_, but the expression on her face said it,
and he understood. “Darling, darling Kootik!” she used the name by
which she had called him when he was little, “you won’t forget me?
You....” but she could not say more.

How often afterwards she thought of words she might have said. But now
she did not know how to say it, and could say nothing. But Seryozha
knew all she wanted to say to him. He understood that she was unhappy
and loved him. He understood even what the nurse had whispered. He had
caught the words “always at nine o’clock,” and he knew that this was
said of his father, and that his father and mother could not meet. That
he understood, but one thing he could not understand—why there should
be a look of dread and shame in her face?... She was not in fault, but
she was afraid of him and ashamed of something. He would have liked to
put a question that would have set at rest this doubt, but he did not
dare; he saw that she was miserable, and he felt for her. Silently he
pressed close to her and whispered, “Don’t go yet. He won’t come just
yet.”

The mother held him away from her to see what he was thinking, what to
say to him, and in his frightened face she read not only that he was
speaking of his father, but, as it were, asking her what he ought to
think about his father.

“Seryozha, my darling,” she said, “love him; he’s better and kinder
than I am, and I have done him wrong. When you grow up you will judge.”

“There’s no one better than you!...” he cried in despair through his
tears, and, clutching her by the shoulders, he began squeezing her with
all his force to him, his arms trembling with the strain.

“My sweet, my little one!” said Anna, and she cried as weakly and
childishly as he.

At that moment the door opened. Vassily Lukitch came in.

At the other door there was the sound of steps, and the nurse in a
scared whisper said, “He’s coming,” and gave Anna her hat.

Seryozha sank onto the bed and sobbed, hiding his face in his hands.
Anna removed his hands, once more kissed his wet face, and with rapid
steps went to the door. Alexey Alexandrovitch walked in, meeting her.
Seeing her, he stopped short and bowed his head.

Although she had just said he was better and kinder than she, in the
rapid glance she flung at him, taking in his whole figure in all its
details, feelings of repulsion and hatred for him and jealousy over her
son took possession of her. With a swift gesture she put down her veil,
and, quickening her pace, almost ran out of the room.

She had not time to undo, and so carried back with her, the parcel of
toys she had chosen the day before in a toy shop with such love and
sorrow.


Chapter 31

As intensely as Anna had longed to see her son, and long as she had
been thinking of it and preparing herself for it, she had not in the
least expected that seeing him would affect her so deeply. On getting
back to her lonely rooms in the hotel she could not for a long while
understand why she was there. “Yes, it’s all over, and I am again
alone,” she said to herself, and without taking off her hat she sat
down in a low chair by the hearth. Fixing her eyes on a bronze clock
standing on a table between the windows, she tried to think.

The French maid brought from abroad came in to suggest she should
dress. She gazed at her wonderingly and said, “Presently.” A footman
offered her coffee. “Later on,” she said.

The Italian nurse, after having taken the baby out in her best, came in
with her, and brought her to Anna. The plump, well-fed little baby, on
seeing her mother, as she always did, held out her fat little hands,
and with a smile on her toothless mouth, began, like a fish with a
float, bobbing her fingers up and down the starched folds of her
embroidered skirt, making them rustle. It was impossible not to smile,
not to kiss the baby, impossible not to hold out a finger for her to
clutch, crowing and prancing all over; impossible not to offer her a
lip which she sucked into her little mouth by way of a kiss. And all
this Anna did, and took her in her arms and made her dance, and kissed
her fresh little cheek and bare little elbows; but at the sight of this
child it was plainer than ever to her that the feeling she had for her
could not be called love in comparison with what she felt for Seryozha.
Everything in this baby was charming, but for some reason all this did
not go deep to her heart. On her first child, though the child of an
unloved father, had been concentrated all the love that had never found
satisfaction. Her baby girl had been born in the most painful
circumstances and had not had a hundredth part of the care and thought
which had been concentrated on her first child. Besides, in the little
girl everything was still in the future, while Seryozha was by now
almost a personality, and a personality dearly loved. In him there was
a conflict of thought and feeling; he understood her, he loved her, he
judged her, she thought, recalling his words and his eyes. And she was
forever—not physically only but spiritually—divided from him, and it
was impossible to set this right.

She gave the baby back to the nurse, let her go, and opened the locket
in which there was Seryozha’s portrait when he was almost of the same
age as the girl. She got up, and, taking off her hat, took up from a
little table an album in which there were photographs of her son at
different ages. She wanted to compare them, and began taking them out
of the album. She took them all out except one, the latest and best
photograph. In it he was in a white smock, sitting astride a chair,
with frowning eyes and smiling lips. It was his best, most
characteristic expression. With her little supple hands, her white,
delicate fingers, that moved with a peculiar intensity today, she
pulled at a corner of the photograph, but the photograph had caught
somewhere, and she could not get it out. There was no paper-knife on
the table, and so, pulling out the photograph that was next to her
son’s (it was a photograph of Vronsky taken at Rome in a round hat and
with long hair), she used it to push out her son’s photograph. “Oh,
here is he!” she said, glancing at the portrait of Vronsky, and she
suddenly recalled that he was the cause of her present misery. She had
not once thought of him all the morning. But now, coming all at once
upon that manly, noble face, so familiar and so dear to her, she felt a
sudden rush of love for him.

“But where is he? How is it he leaves me alone in my misery?” she
thought all at once with a feeling of reproach, forgetting she had
herself kept from him everything concerning her son. She sent to ask
him to come to her immediately; with a throbbing heart she awaited him,
rehearsing to herself the words in which she would tell him all, and
the expressions of love with which he would console her. The messenger
returned with the answer that he had a visitor with him, but that he
would come immediately, and that he asked whether she would let him
bring with him Prince Yashvin, who had just arrived in Petersburg.
“He’s not coming alone, and since dinner yesterday he has not seen me,”
she thought; “he’s not coming so that I could tell him everything, but
coming with Yashvin.” And all at once a strange idea came to her: what
if he had ceased to love her?

And going over the events of the last few days, it seemed to her that
she saw in everything a confirmation of this terrible idea. The fact
that he had not dined at home yesterday, and the fact that he had
insisted on their taking separate sets of rooms in Petersburg, and that
even now he was not coming to her alone, as though he were trying to
avoid meeting her face to face.

“But he ought to tell me so. I must know that it is so. If I knew it,
then I know what I should do,” she said to herself, utterly unable to
picture to herself the position she would be in if she were convinced
of his not caring for her. She thought he had ceased to love her, she
felt close upon despair, and consequently she felt exceptionally alert.
She rang for her maid and went to her dressing-room. As she dressed,
she took more care over her appearance than she had done all those
days, as though he might, if he had grown cold to her, fall in love
with her again because she had dressed and arranged her hair in the way
most becoming to her.

She heard the bell ring before she was ready. When she went into the
drawing-room it was not he, but Yashvin, who met her eyes. Vronsky was
looking through the photographs of her son, which she had forgotten on
the table, and he made no haste to look round at her.

“We have met already,” she said, putting her little hand into the huge
hand of Yashvin, whose bashfulness was so queerly out of keeping with
his immense frame and coarse face. “We met last year at the races. Give
them to me,” she said, with a rapid movement snatching from Vronsky the
photographs of her son, and glancing significantly at him with flashing
eyes. “Were the races good this year? Instead of them I saw the races
in the Corso in Rome. But you don’t care for life abroad,” she said
with a cordial smile. “I know you and all your tastes, though I have
seen so little of you.”

“I’m awfully sorry for that, for my tastes are mostly bad,” said
Yashvin, gnawing at his left mustache.

Having talked a little while, and noticing that Vronsky glanced at the
clock, Yashvin asked her whether she would be staying much longer in
Petersburg, and unbending his huge figure reached after his cap.

“Not long, I think,” she said hesitatingly, glancing at Vronsky.

“So then we shan’t meet again?”

“Come and dine with me,” said Anna resolutely, angry it seemed with
herself for her embarrassment, but flushing as she always did when she
defined her position before a fresh person. “The dinner here is not
good, but at least you will see him. There is no one of his old friends
in the regiment Alexey cares for as he does for you.”

“Delighted,” said Yashvin with a smile, from which Vronsky could see
that he liked Anna very much.

Yashvin said good-bye and went away; Vronsky stayed behind.

“Are you going too?” she said to him.

“I’m late already,” he answered. “Run along! I’ll catch you up in a
moment,” he called to Yashvin.

She took him by the hand, and without taking her eyes off him, gazed at
him while she ransacked her mind for the words to say that would keep
him.

“Wait a minute, there’s something I want to say to you,” and taking his
broad hand she pressed it on her neck. “Oh, was it right my asking him
to dinner?”

“You did quite right,” he said with a serene smile that showed his even
teeth, and he kissed her hand.

“Alexey, you have not changed to me?” she said, pressing his hand in
both of hers. “Alexey, I am miserable here. When are we going away?”

“Soon, soon. You wouldn’t believe how disagreeable our way of living
here is to me too,” he said, and he drew away his hand.

“Well, go, go!” she said in a tone of offense, and she walked quickly
away from him.


Chapter 32

When Vronsky returned home, Anna was not yet home. Soon after he had
left, some lady, so they told him, had come to see her, and she had
gone out with her. That she had gone out without leaving word where she
was going, that she had not yet come back, and that all the morning she
had been going about somewhere without a word to him—all this, together
with the strange look of excitement in her face in the morning, and the
recollection of the hostile tone with which she had before Yashvin
almost snatched her son’s photographs out of his hands, made him
serious. He decided he absolutely must speak openly with her. And he
waited for her in her drawing-room. But Anna did not return alone, but
brought with her her old unmarried aunt, Princess Oblonskaya. This was
the lady who had come in the morning, and with whom Anna had gone out
shopping. Anna appeared not to notice Vronsky’s worried and inquiring
expression, and began a lively account of her morning’s shopping. He
saw that there was something working within her; in her flashing eyes,
when they rested for a moment on him, there was an intense
concentration, and in her words and movements there was that nervous
rapidity and grace which, during the early period of their intimacy,
had so fascinated him, but which now so disturbed and alarmed him.

The dinner was laid for four. All were gathered together and about to
go into the little dining-room when Tushkevitch made his appearance
with a message from Princess Betsy. Princess Betsy begged her to excuse
her not having come to say good-bye; she had been indisposed, but
begged Anna to come to her between half-past six and nine o’clock.
Vronsky glanced at Anna at the precise limit of time, so suggestive of
steps having been taken that she should meet no one; but Anna appeared
not to notice it.

“Very sorry that I can’t come just between half-past six and nine,” she
said with a faint smile.

“The princess will be very sorry.”

“And so am I.”

“You’re going, no doubt, to hear Patti?” said Tushkevitch.

“Patti? You suggest the idea to me. I would go if it were possible to
get a box.”

“I can get one,” Tushkevitch offered his services.

“I should be very, very grateful to you,” said Anna. “But won’t you
dine with us?”

Vronsky gave a hardly perceptible shrug. He was at a complete loss to
understand what Anna was about. What had she brought the old Princess
Oblonskaya home for, what had she made Tushkevitch stay to dinner for,
and, most amazing of all, why was she sending him for a box? Could she
possibly think in her position of going to Patti’s benefit, where all
the circle of her acquaintances would be? He looked at her with serious
eyes, but she responded with that defiant, half-mirthful,
half-desperate look, the meaning of which he could not comprehend. At
dinner Anna was in aggressively high spirits—she almost flirted both
with Tushkevitch and with Yashvin. When they got up from dinner and
Tushkevitch had gone to get a box at the opera, Yashvin went to smoke,
and Vronsky went down with him to his own rooms. After sitting there
for some time he ran upstairs. Anna was already dressed in a low-necked
gown of light silk and velvet that she had had made in Paris, and with
costly white lace on her head, framing her face, and particularly
becoming, showing up her dazzling beauty.

“Are you really going to the theater?” he said, trying not to look at
her.

“Why do you ask with such alarm?” she said, wounded again at his not
looking at her. “Why shouldn’t I go?”

She appeared not to understand the motive of his words.

“Oh, of course, there’s no reason whatever,” he said, frowning.

“That’s just what I say,” she said, willfully refusing to see the irony
of his tone, and quietly turning back her long, perfumed glove.

“Anna, for God’s sake! what is the matter with you?” he said, appealing
to her exactly as once her husband had done.

“I don’t understand what you are asking.”

“You know that it’s out of the question to go.”

“Why so? I’m not going alone. Princess Varvara has gone to dress, she
is going with me.”

He shrugged his shoulders with an air of perplexity and despair.

“But do you mean to say you don’t know?...” he began.

“But I don’t care to know!” she almost shrieked. “I don’t care to. Do I
regret what I have done? No, no, no! If it were all to do again from
the beginning, it would be the same. For us, for you and for me, there
is only one thing that matters, whether we love each other. Other
people we need not consider. Why are we living here apart and not
seeing each other? Why can’t I go? I love you, and I don’t care for
anything,” she said in Russian, glancing at him with a peculiar gleam
in her eyes that he could not understand. “If you have not changed to
me, why don’t you look at me?”

He looked at her. He saw all the beauty of her face and full dress,
always so becoming to her. But now her beauty and elegance were just
what irritated him.

“My feeling cannot change, you know, but I beg you, I entreat you,” he
said again in French, with a note of tender supplication in his voice,
but with coldness in his eyes.

She did not hear his words, but she saw the coldness of his eyes, and
answered with irritation:

“And I beg you to explain why I should not go.”

“Because it might cause you....” he hesitated.

“I don’t understand. Yashvin _n’est pas compromettant_, and Princess
Varvara is no worse than others. Oh, here she is!”


Chapter 33

Vronsky for the first time experienced a feeling of anger against Anna,
almost a hatred for her willfully refusing to understand her own
position. This feeling was aggravated by his being unable to tell her
plainly the cause of his anger. If he had told her directly what he was
thinking, he would have said:

“In that dress, with a princess only too well known to everyone, to
show yourself at the theater is equivalent not merely to acknowledging
your position as a fallen woman, but is flinging down a challenge to
society, that is to say, cutting yourself off from it forever.”

He could not say that to her. “But how can she fail to see it, and what
is going on in her?” he said to himself. He felt at the same time that
his respect for her was diminished while his sense of her beauty was
intensified.

He went back scowling to his rooms, and sitting down beside Yashvin,
who, with his long legs stretched out on a chair, was drinking brandy
and seltzer water, he ordered a glass of the same for himself.

“You were talking of Lankovsky’s Powerful. That’s a fine horse, and I
would advise you to buy him,” said Yashvin, glancing at his comrade’s
gloomy face. “His hind-quarters aren’t quite first-rate, but the legs
and head—one couldn’t wish for anything better.”

“I think I will take him,” answered Vronsky.

Their conversation about horses interested him, but he did not for an
instant forget Anna, and could not help listening to the sound of steps
in the corridor and looking at the clock on the chimney piece.

“Anna Arkadyevna gave orders to announce that she has gone to the
theater.”

Yashvin, tipping another glass of brandy into the bubbling water, drank
it and got up, buttoning his coat.

“Well, let’s go,” he said, faintly smiling under his mustache, and
showing by this smile that he knew the cause of Vronsky’s gloominess,
and did not attach any significance to it.

“I’m not going,” Vronsky answered gloomily.

“Well, I must, I promised to. Good-bye, then. If you do, come to the
stalls; you can take Kruzin’s stall,” added Yashvin as he went out.

“No, I’m busy.”

“A wife is a care, but it’s worse when she’s not a wife,” thought
Yashvin, as he walked out of the hotel.

Vronsky, left alone, got up from his chair and began pacing up and down
the room.

“And what’s today? The fourth night.... Yegor and his wife are there,
and my mother, most likely. Of course all Petersburg’s there. Now she’s
gone in, taken off her cloak and come into the light. Tushkevitch,
Yashvin, Princess Varvara,” he pictured them to himself.... “What about
me? Either that I’m frightened or have given up to Tushkevitch the
right to protect her? From every point of view—stupid, stupid!... And
why is she putting me in such a position?” he said with a gesture of
despair.

With that gesture he knocked against the table, on which there was
standing the seltzer water and the decanter of brandy, and almost upset
it. He tried to catch it, let it slip, and angrily kicked the table
over and rang.

“If you care to be in my service,” he said to the valet who came in,
“you had better remember your duties. This shouldn’t be here. You ought
to have cleared away.”

The valet, conscious of his own innocence, would have defended himself,
but glancing at his master, he saw from his face that the only thing to
do was to be silent, and hurriedly threading his way in and out,
dropped down on the carpet and began gathering up the whole and broken
glasses and bottles.

“That’s not your duty; send the waiter to clear away, and get my dress
coat out.”

Vronsky went into the theater at half-past eight. The performance was
in full swing. The little old box-keeper, recognizing Vronsky as he
helped him off with his fur coat, called him “Your Excellency,” and
suggested he should not take a number but should simply call Fyodor. In
the brightly lighted corridor there was no one but the box-opener and
two attendants with fur cloaks on their arms listening at the doors.
Through the closed doors came the sounds of the discreet _staccato_
accompaniment of the orchestra, and a single female voice rendering
distinctly a musical phrase. The door opened to let the box-opener slip
through, and the phrase drawing to the end reached Vronsky’s hearing
clearly. But the doors were closed again at once, and Vronsky did not
hear the end of the phrase and the cadence of the accompaniment, though
he knew from the thunder of applause that it was over. When he entered
the hall, brilliantly lighted with chandeliers and gas jets, the noise
was still going on. On the stage the singer, bowing and smiling, with
bare shoulders flashing with diamonds, was, with the help of the tenor
who had given her his arm, gathering up the bouquets that were flying
awkwardly over the footlights. Then she went up to a gentleman with
glossy pomaded hair parted down the center, who was stretching across
the footlights holding out something to her, and all the public in the
stalls as well as in the boxes was in excitement, craning forward,
shouting and clapping. The conductor in his high chair assisted in
passing the offering, and straightened his white tie. Vronsky walked
into the middle of the stalls, and, standing still, began looking about
him. That day less than ever was his attention turned upon the
familiar, habitual surroundings, the stage, the noise, all the
familiar, uninteresting, particolored herd of spectators in the packed
theater.

There were, as always, the same ladies of some sort with officers of
some sort in the back of the boxes; the same gaily dressed women—God
knows who—and uniforms and black coats; the same dirty crowd in the
upper gallery; and among the crowd, in the boxes and in the front rows,
were some forty of the _real_ people. And to those oases Vronsky at
once directed his attention, and with them he entered at once into
relation.

The act was over when he went in, and so he did not go straight to his
brother’s box, but going up to the first row of stalls stopped at the
footlights with Serpuhovskoy, who, standing with one knee raised and
his heel on the footlights, caught sight of him in the distance and
beckoned to him, smiling.

Vronsky had not yet seen Anna. He purposely avoided looking in her
direction. But he knew by the direction of people’s eyes where she was.
He looked round discreetly, but he was not seeking her; expecting the
worst, his eyes sought for Alexey Alexandrovitch. To his relief Alexey
Alexandrovitch was not in the theater that evening.

“How little of the military man there is left in you!” Serpuhovskoy was
saying to him. “A diplomat, an artist, something of that sort, one
would say.”

“Yes, it was like going back home when I put on a black coat,” answered
Vronsky, smiling and slowly taking out his opera-glass.

“Well, I’ll own I envy you there. When I come back from abroad and put
on this,” he touched his epaulets, “I regret my freedom.”

Serpuhovskoy had long given up all hope of Vronsky’s career, but he
liked him as before, and was now particularly cordial to him.

“What a pity you were not in time for the first act!”

Vronsky, listening with one ear, moved his opera-glass from the stalls
and scanned the boxes. Near a lady in a turban and a bald old man, who
seemed to wave angrily in the moving opera-glass, Vronsky suddenly
caught sight of Anna’s head, proud, strikingly beautiful, and smiling
in the frame of lace. She was in the fifth box, twenty paces from him.
She was sitting in front, and slightly turning, was saying something to
Yashvin. The setting of her head on her handsome, broad shoulders, and
the restrained excitement and brilliance of her eyes and her whole face
reminded him of her just as he had seen her at the ball in Moscow. But
he felt utterly different towards her beauty now. In his feeling for
her now there was no element of mystery, and so her beauty, though it
attracted him even more intensely than before, gave him now a sense of
injury. She was not looking in his direction, but Vronsky felt that she
had seen him already.

When Vronsky turned the opera-glass again in that direction, he noticed
that Princess Varvara was particularly red, and kept laughing
unnaturally and looking round at the next box. Anna, folding her fan
and tapping it on the red velvet, was gazing away and did not see, and
obviously did not wish to see, what was taking place in the next box.
Yashvin’s face wore the expression which was common when he was losing
at cards. Scowling, he sucked the left end of his mustache further and
further into his mouth, and cast sidelong glances at the next box.

In that box on the left were the Kartasovs. Vronsky knew them, and knew
that Anna was acquainted with them. Madame Kartasova, a thin little
woman, was standing up in her box, and, her back turned upon Anna, she
was putting on a mantle that her husband was holding for her. Her face
was pale and angry, and she was talking excitedly. Kartasov, a fat,
bald man, was continually looking round at Anna, while he attempted to
soothe his wife. When the wife had gone out, the husband lingered a
long while, and tried to catch Anna’s eye, obviously anxious to bow to
her. But Anna, with unmistakable intention, avoided noticing him, and
talked to Yashvin, whose cropped head was bent down to her. Kartasov
went out without making his salutation, and the box was left empty.

Vronsky could not understand exactly what had passed between the
Kartasovs and Anna, but he saw that something humiliating for Anna had
happened. He knew this both from what he had seen, and most of all from
the face of Anna, who, he could see, was taxing every nerve to carry
through the part she had taken up. And in maintaining this attitude of
external composure she was completely successful. Anyone who did not
know her and her circle, who had not heard all the utterances of the
women expressive of commiseration, indignation, and amazement, that she
should show herself in society, and show herself so conspicuously with
her lace and her beauty, would have admired the serenity and loveliness
of this woman without a suspicion that she was undergoing the
sensations of a man in the stocks.

Knowing that something had happened, but not knowing precisely what,
Vronsky felt a thrill of agonizing anxiety, and hoping to find out
something, he went towards his brother’s box. Purposely choosing the
way round furthest from Anna’s box, he jostled as he came out against
the colonel of his old regiment talking to two acquaintances. Vronsky
heard the name of Madame Karenina, and noticed how the colonel hastened
to address Vronsky loudly by name, with a meaning glance at his
companions.

“Ah, Vronsky! When are you coming to the regiment? We can’t let you off
without a supper. You’re one of the old set,” said the colonel of his
regiment.

“I can’t stop, awfully sorry, another time,” said Vronsky, and he ran
upstairs towards his brother’s box.

The old countess, Vronsky’s mother, with her steel-gray curls, was in
his brother’s box. Varya with the young Princess Sorokina met him in
the corridor.

Leaving the Princess Sorokina with her mother, Varya held out her hand
to her brother-in-law, and began immediately to speak of what
interested him. She was more excited than he had ever seen her.

“I think it’s mean and hateful, and Madame Kartasova had no right to do
it. Madame Karenina....” she began.

“But what is it? I don’t know.”

“What? you’ve not heard?”

“You know I should be the last person to hear of it.”

“There isn’t a more spiteful creature than that Madame Kartasova!”

“But what did she do?”

“My husband told me.... She has insulted Madame Karenina. Her husband
began talking to her across the box, and Madame Kartasova made a scene.
She said something aloud, he says, something insulting, and went away.”

“Count, your maman is asking for you,” said the young Princess
Sorokina, peeping out of the door of the box.

“I’ve been expecting you all the while,” said his mother, smiling
sarcastically. “You were nowhere to be seen.”

Her son saw that she could not suppress a smile of delight.

“Good evening, maman. I have come to you,” he said coldly.

“Why aren’t you going to _faire la cour à Madame Karenina?_” she went
on, when Princess Sorokina had moved away. “_Elle fait sensation. On
oublie la Patti pour elle_.”

“Maman, I have asked you not to say anything to me of that,” he
answered, scowling.

“I’m only saying what everyone’s saying.”

Vronsky made no reply, and saying a few words to Princess Sorokina, he
went away. At the door he met his brother.

“Ah, Alexey!” said his brother. “How disgusting! Idiot of a woman,
nothing else.... I wanted to go straight to her. Let’s go together.”

Vronsky did not hear him. With rapid steps he went downstairs; he felt
that he must do something, but he did not know what. Anger with her for
having put herself and him in such a false position, together with pity
for her suffering, filled his heart. He went down, and made straight
for Anna’s box. At her box stood Stremov, talking to her.

“There are no more tenors. _Le moule en est brisé!_”

Vronsky bowed to her and stopped to greet Stremov.

“You came in late, I think, and have missed the best song,” Anna said
to Vronsky, glancing ironically, he thought, at him.

“I am a poor judge of music,” he said, looking sternly at her.

“Like Prince Yashvin,” she said smiling, “who considers that Patti
sings too loud.”

“Thank you,” she said, her little hand in its long glove taking the
playbill Vronsky picked up, and suddenly at that instant her lovely
face quivered. She got up and went into the interior of the box.

Noticing in the next act that her box was empty, Vronsky, rousing
indignant “hushes” in the silent audience, went out in the middle of a
solo and drove home.

Anna was already at home. When Vronsky went up to her, she was in the
same dress as she had worn at the theater. She was sitting in the first
armchair against the wall, looking straight before her. She looked at
him, and at once resumed her former position.

“Anna,” he said.

“You, you are to blame for everything!” she cried, with tears of
despair and hatred in her voice, getting up.

“I begged, I implored you not to go, I knew it would be unpleasant....”

“Unpleasant!” she cried—“hideous! As long as I live I shall never
forget it. She said it was a disgrace to sit beside me.”

“A silly woman’s chatter,” he said: “but why risk it, why provoke?...”

“I hate your calm. You ought not to have brought me to this. If you had
loved me....”

“Anna! How does the question of my love come in?”

“Oh, if you loved me, as I love, if you were tortured as I am!...” she
said, looking at him with an expression of terror.

He was sorry for her, and angry notwithstanding. He assured her of his
love because he saw that this was the only means of soothing her, and
he did not reproach her in words, but in his heart he reproached her.

And the asseverations of his love, which seemed to him so vulgar that
he was ashamed to utter them, she drank in eagerly, and gradually
became calmer. The next day, completely reconciled, they left for the
country.




PART SIX

Chapter 1


Darya Alexandrovna spent the summer with her children at Pokrovskoe, at
her sister Kitty Levin’s. The house on her own estate was quite in
ruins, and Levin and his wife had persuaded her to spend the summer
with them. Stepan Arkadyevitch greatly approved of the arrangement. He
said he was very sorry his official duties prevented him from spending
the summer in the country with his family, which would have been the
greatest happiness for him; and remaining in Moscow, he came down to
the country from time to time for a day or two. Besides the Oblonskys,
with all their children and their governess, the old princess too came
to stay that summer with the Levins, as she considered it her duty to
watch over her inexperienced daughter in her _interesting condition_.
Moreover, Varenka, Kitty’s friend abroad, kept her promise to come to
Kitty when she was married, and stayed with her friend. All of these
were friends or relations of Levin’s wife. And though he liked them
all, he rather regretted his own Levin world and ways, which was
smothered by this influx of the “Shtcherbatsky element,” as he called
it to himself. Of his own relations there stayed with him only Sergey
Ivanovitch, but he too was a man of the Koznishev and not the Levin
stamp, so that the Levin spirit was utterly obliterated.

In the Levins’ house, so long deserted, there were now so many people
that almost all the rooms were occupied, and almost every day it
happened that the old princess, sitting down to table, counted them all
over, and put the thirteenth grandson or granddaughter at a separate
table. And Kitty, with her careful housekeeping, had no little trouble
to get all the chickens, turkeys, and geese, of which so many were
needed to satisfy the summer appetites of the visitors and children.

The whole family were sitting at dinner. Dolly’s children, with their
governess and Varenka, were making plans for going to look for
mushrooms. Sergey Ivanovitch, who was looked up to by all the party for
his intellect and learning, with a respect that almost amounted to awe,
surprised everyone by joining in the conversation about mushrooms.

“Take me with you. I am very fond of picking mushrooms,” he said,
looking at Varenka; “I think it’s a very nice occupation.”

“Oh, we shall be delighted,” answered Varenka, coloring a little. Kitty
exchanged meaningful glances with Dolly. The proposal of the learned
and intellectual Sergey Ivanovitch to go looking for mushrooms with
Varenka confirmed certain theories of Kitty’s with which her mind had
been very busy of late. She made haste to address some remark to her
mother, so that her look should not be noticed. After dinner Sergey
Ivanovitch sat with his cup of coffee at the drawing-room window, and
while he took part in a conversation he had begun with his brother, he
watched the door through which the children would start on the
mushroom-picking expedition. Levin was sitting in the window near his
brother.

Kitty stood beside her husband, evidently awaiting the end of a
conversation that had no interest for her, in order to tell him
something.

“You have changed in many respects since your marriage, and for the
better,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling to Kitty, and obviously little
interested in the conversation, “but you have remained true to your
passion for defending the most paradoxical theories.”

“Katya, it’s not good for you to stand,” her husband said to her,
putting a chair for her and looking significantly at her.

“Oh, and there’s no time either,” added Sergey Ivanovitch, seeing the
children running out.

At the head of them all Tanya galloped sideways, in her tightly-drawn
stockings, and waving a basket and Sergey Ivanovitch’s hat, she ran
straight up to him.

Boldly running up to Sergey Ivanovitch with shining eyes, so like her
father’s fine eyes, she handed him his hat and made as though she would
put it on for him, softening her freedom by a shy and friendly smile.

“Varenka’s waiting,” she said, carefully putting his hat on, seeing
from Sergey Ivanovitch’s smile that she might do so.

Varenka was standing at the door, dressed in a yellow print gown, with
a white kerchief on her head.

“I’m coming, I’m coming, Varvara Andreevna,” said Sergey Ivanovitch,
finishing his cup of coffee, and putting into their separate pockets
his handkerchief and cigar-case.

“And how sweet my Varenka is! eh?” said Kitty to her husband, as soon
as Sergey Ivanovitch rose. She spoke so that Sergey Ivanovitch could
hear, and it was clear that she meant him to do so. “And how
good-looking she is—such a refined beauty! Varenka!” Kitty shouted.
“Shall you be in the mill copse? We’ll come out to you.”

“You certainly forget your condition, Kitty,” said the old princess,
hurriedly coming out at the door. “You mustn’t shout like that.”

Varenka, hearing Kitty’s voice and her mother’s reprimand, went with
light, rapid steps up to Kitty. The rapidity of her movement, her
flushed and eager face, everything betrayed that something out of the
common was going on in her. Kitty knew what this was, and had been
watching her intently. She called Varenka at that moment merely in
order mentally to give her a blessing for the important event which, as
Kitty fancied, was bound to come to pass that day after dinner in the
wood.

“Varenka, I should be very happy if a certain something were to
happen,” she whispered as she kissed her.

“And are you coming with us?” Varenka said to Levin in confusion,
pretending not to have heard what had been said.

“I am coming, but only as far as the threshing-floor, and there I shall
stop.”

“Why, what do you want there?” said Kitty.

“I must go to have a look at the new wagons, and to check the invoice,”
said Levin; “and where will you be?”

“On the terrace.”


Chapter 2

On the terrace were assembled all the ladies of the party. They always
liked sitting there after dinner, and that day they had work to do
there too. Besides the sewing and knitting of baby clothes, with which
all of them were busy, that afternoon jam was being made on the terrace
by a method new to Agafea Mihalovna, without the addition of water.
Kitty had introduced this new method, which had been in use in her
home. Agafea Mihalovna, to whom the task of jam-making had always been
intrusted, considering that what had been done in the Levin household
could not be amiss, had nevertheless put water with the strawberries,
maintaining that the jam could not be made without it. She had been
caught in the act, and was now making jam before everyone, and it was
to be proved to her conclusively that jam could be very well made
without water.

Agafea Mihalovna, her face heated and angry, her hair untidy, and her
thin arms bare to the elbows, was turning the preserving-pan over the
charcoal stove, looking darkly at the raspberries and devoutly hoping
they would stick and not cook properly. The princess, conscious that
Agafea Mihalovna’s wrath must be chiefly directed against her, as the
person responsible for the raspberry jam-making, tried to appear to be
absorbed in other things and not interested in the jam, talked of other
matters, but cast stealthy glances in the direction of the stove.

“I always buy my maids’ dresses myself, of some cheap material,” the
princess said, continuing the previous conversation. “Isn’t it time to
skim it, my dear?” she added, addressing Agafea Mihalovna. “There’s not
the slightest need for you to do it, and it’s hot for you,” she said,
stopping Kitty.

“I’ll do it,” said Dolly, and getting up, she carefully passed the
spoon over the frothing sugar, and from time to time shook off the
clinging jam from the spoon by knocking it on a plate that was covered
with yellow-red scum and blood-colored syrup. “How they’ll enjoy this
at tea-time!” she thought of her children, remembering how she herself
as a child had wondered how it was the grown-up people did not eat what
was best of all—the scum of the jam.

“Stiva says it’s much better to give money.” Dolly took up meanwhile
the weighty subject under discussion, what presents should be made to
servants. “But....”

“Money’s out of the question!” the princess and Kitty exclaimed with
one voice. “They appreciate a present....”

“Well, last year, for instance, I bought our Matrona Semyenovna, not a
poplin, but something of that sort,” said the princess.

“I remember she was wearing it on your nameday.”

“A charming pattern—so simple and refined,—I should have liked it
myself, if she hadn’t had it. Something like Varenka’s. So pretty and
inexpensive.”

“Well, now I think it’s done,” said Dolly, dropping the syrup from the
spoon.

“When it sets as it drops, it’s ready. Cook it a little longer, Agafea
Mihalovna.”

“The flies!” said Agafea Mihalovna angrily. “It’ll be just the same,”
she added.

“Ah! how sweet it is! don’t frighten it!” Kitty said suddenly, looking
at a sparrow that had settled on the step and was pecking at the center
of a raspberry.

“Yes, but you keep a little further from the stove,” said her mother.

“_À propos de Varenka_,” said Kitty, speaking in French, as they had
been doing all the while, so that Agafea Mihalovna should not
understand them, “you know, mamma, I somehow expect things to be
settled today. You know what I mean. How splendid it would be!”

“But what a famous matchmaker she is!” said Dolly. “How carefully and
cleverly she throws them together!...”

“No; tell me, mamma, what do you think?”

“Why, what is one to think? He” (_he_ meant Sergey Ivanovitch) “might
at any time have been a match for anyone in Russia; now, of course,
he’s not quite a young man, still I know ever so many girls would be
glad to marry him even now.... She’s a very nice girl, but he
might....”

“Oh, no, mamma, do understand why, for him and for her too, nothing
better could be imagined. In the first place, she’s charming!” said
Kitty, crooking one of her fingers.

“He thinks her very attractive, that’s certain,” assented Dolly.

“Then he occupies such a position in society that he has no need to
look for either fortune or position in his wife. All he needs is a
good, sweet wife—a restful one.”

“Well, with her he would certainly be restful,” Dolly assented.

“Thirdly, that she should love him. And so it is ... that is, it would
be so splendid!... I look forward to seeing them coming out of the
forest—and everything settled. I shall see at once by their eyes. I
should be so delighted! What do you think, Dolly?”

“But don’t excite yourself. It’s not at all the thing for you to be
excited,” said her mother.

“Oh, I’m not excited, mamma. I fancy he will make her an offer today.”

“Ah, that’s so strange, how and when a man makes an offer!... There is
a sort of barrier, and all at once it’s broken down,” said Dolly,
smiling pensively and recalling her past with Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“Mamma, how did papa make you an offer?” Kitty asked suddenly.

“There was nothing out of the way, it was very simple,” answered the
princess, but her face beamed all over at the recollection.

“Oh, but how was it? You loved him, anyway, before you were allowed to
speak?”

Kitty felt a peculiar pleasure in being able now to talk to her mother
on equal terms about those questions of such paramount interest in a
woman’s life.

“Of course I did; he had come to stay with us in the country.”

“But how was it settled between you, mamma?”

“You imagine, I dare say, that you invented something quite new? It’s
always just the same: it was settled by the eyes, by smiles....”

“How nicely you said that, mamma! It’s just by the eyes, by smiles that
it’s done,” Dolly assented.

“But what words did he say?”

“What did Kostya say to you?”

“He wrote it in chalk. It was wonderful.... How long ago it seems!” she
said.

And the three women all fell to musing on the same thing. Kitty was the
first to break the silence. She remembered all that last winter before
her marriage, and her passion for Vronsky.

“There’s one thing ... that old love affair of Varenka’s,” she said, a
natural chain of ideas bringing her to this point. “I should have liked
to say something to Sergey Ivanovitch, to prepare him. They’re all—all
men, I mean,” she added, “awfully jealous over our past.”

“Not all,” said Dolly. “You judge by your own husband. It makes him
miserable even now to remember Vronsky. Eh? that’s true, isn’t it?”

“Yes,” Kitty answered, a pensive smile in her eyes.

“But I really don’t know,” the mother put in in defense of her motherly
care of her daughter, “what there was in your past that could worry
him? That Vronsky paid you attentions—that happens to every girl.”

“Oh, yes, but we didn’t mean that,” Kitty said, flushing a little.

“No, let me speak,” her mother went on, “why, you yourself would not
let me have a talk to Vronsky. Don’t you remember?”

“Oh, mamma!” said Kitty, with an expression of suffering.

“There’s no keeping you young people in check nowadays.... Your
friendship could not have gone beyond what was suitable. I should
myself have called upon him to explain himself. But, my darling, it’s
not right for you to be agitated. Please remember that, and calm
yourself.”

“I’m perfectly calm, maman.”

“How happy it was for Kitty that Anna came then,” said Dolly, “and how
unhappy for her. It turned out quite the opposite,” she said, struck by
her own ideas. “Then Anna was so happy, and Kitty thought herself
unhappy. Now it is just the opposite. I often think of her.”

“A nice person to think about! Horrid, repulsive woman—no heart,” said
her mother, who could not forget that Kitty had married not Vronsky,
but Levin.

“What do you want to talk of it for?” Kitty said with annoyance. “I
never think about it, and I don’t want to think of it.... And I don’t
want to think of it,” she said, catching the sound of her husband’s
well-known step on the steps of the terrace.

“What’s that you don’t want to think about?” inquired Levin, coming
onto the terrace.

But no one answered him, and he did not repeat the question.

“I’m sorry I’ve broken in on your feminine parliament,” he said,
looking round on everyone discontentedly, and perceiving that they had
been talking of something which they would not talk about before him.

For a second he felt that he was sharing the feeling of Agafea
Mihalovna, vexation at their making jam without water, and altogether
at the outside Shtcherbatsky element. He smiled, however, and went up
to Kitty.

“Well, how are you?” he asked her, looking at her with the expression
with which everyone looked at her now.

“Oh, very well,” said Kitty, smiling, “and how have things gone with
you?”

“The wagons held three times as much as the old carts did. Well, are we
going for the children? I’ve ordered the horses to be put in.”

“What! you want to take Kitty in the wagonette?” her mother said
reproachfully.

“Yes, at a walking pace, princess.”

Levin never called the princess “maman” as men often do call their
mothers-in-law, and the princess disliked his not doing so. But though
he liked and respected the princess, Levin could not call her so
without a sense of profaning his feeling for his dead mother.

“Come with us, maman,” said Kitty.

“I don’t like to see such imprudence.”

“Well, I’ll walk then, I’m so well.” Kitty got up and went to her
husband and took his hand.

“You may be well, but everything in moderation,” said the princess.

“Well, Agafea Mihalovna, is the jam done?” said Levin, smiling to
Agafea Mihalovna, and trying to cheer her up. “Is it all right in the
new way?”

“I suppose it’s all right. For our notions it’s boiled too long.”

“It’ll be all the better, Agafea Mihalovna, it won’t mildew, even
though our ice has begun to thaw already, so that we’ve no cool cellar
to store it,” said Kitty, at once divining her husband’s motive, and
addressing the old housekeeper with the same feeling; “but your
pickle’s so good, that mamma says she never tasted any like it,” she
added, smiling, and putting her kerchief straight.

Agafea Mihalovna looked angrily at Kitty.

“You needn’t try to console me, mistress. I need only to look at you
with him, and I feel happy,” she said, and something in the rough
familiarity of that _with him_ touched Kitty.

“Come along with us to look for mushrooms, you will show us the best
places.” Agafea Mihalovna smiled and shook her head, as though to say:
“I should like to be angry with you too, but I can’t.”

“Do it, please, by my receipt,” said the princess; “put some paper over
the jam, and moisten it with a little rum, and without even ice, it
will never go mildewy.”


Chapter 3

Kitty was particularly glad of a chance of being alone with her
husband, for she had noticed the shade of mortification that had passed
over his face—always so quick to reflect every feeling—at the moment
when he had come onto the terrace and asked what they were talking of,
and had got no answer.

When they had set off on foot ahead of the others, and had come out of
sight of the house onto the beaten dusty road, marked with rusty wheels
and sprinkled with grains of corn, she clung faster to his arm and
pressed it closer to her. He had quite forgotten the momentary
unpleasant impression, and alone with her he felt, now that the thought
of her approaching motherhood was never for a moment absent from his
mind, a new and delicious bliss, quite pure from all alloy of sense, in
the being near to the woman he loved. There was no need of speech, yet
he longed to hear the sound of her voice, which like her eyes had
changed since she had been with child. In her voice, as in her eyes,
there was that softness and gravity which is found in people
continually concentrated on some cherished pursuit.

“So you’re not tired? Lean more on me,” said he.

“No, I’m so glad of a chance of being alone with you, and I must own,
though I’m happy with them, I do regret our winter evenings alone.”

“That was good, but this is even better. Both are better,” he said,
squeezing her hand.

“Do you know what we were talking about when you came in?”

“About jam?”

“Oh, yes, about jam too; but afterwards, about how men make offers.”

“Ah!” said Levin, listening more to the sound of her voice than to the
words she was saying, and all the while paying attention to the road,
which passed now through the forest, and avoiding places where she
might make a false step.

“And about Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka. You’ve noticed?... I’m very
anxious for it,” she went on. “What do you think about it?” And she
peeped into his face.

“I don’t know what to think,” Levin answered, smiling. “Sergey seems
very strange to me in that way. I told you, you know....”

“Yes, that he was in love with that girl who died....”

“That was when I was a child; I know about it from hearsay and
tradition. I remember him then. He was wonderfully sweet. But I’ve
watched him since with women; he is friendly, some of them he likes,
but one feels that to him they’re simply people, not women.”

“Yes, but now with Varenka ... I fancy there’s something....”

“Perhaps there is.... But one has to know him.... He’s a peculiar,
wonderful person. He lives a spiritual life only. He’s too pure, too
exalted a nature.”

“Why? Would this lower him, then?”

“No, but he’s so used to a spiritual life that he can’t reconcile
himself with actual fact, and Varenka is after all fact.”

Levin had grown used by now to uttering his thought boldly, without
taking the trouble of clothing it in exact language. He knew that his
wife, in such moments of loving tenderness as now, would understand
what he meant to say from a hint, and she did understand him.

“Yes, but there’s not so much of that actual fact about her as about
me. I can see that he would never have cared for me. She is altogether
spiritual.”

“Oh, no, he is so fond of you, and I am always so glad when my people
like you....”

“Yes, he’s very nice to me; but....”

“It’s not as it was with poor Nikolay ... you really cared for each
other,” Levin finished. “Why not speak of him?” he added. “I sometimes
blame myself for not; it ends in one’s forgetting. Ah, how terrible and
dear he was!... Yes, what were we talking about?” Levin said, after a
pause.

“You think he can’t fall in love,” said Kitty, translating into her own
language.

“It’s not so much that he can’t fall in love,” Levin said, smiling,
“but he has not the weakness necessary.... I’ve always envied him, and
even now, when I’m so happy, I still envy him.”

“You envy him for not being able to fall in love?”

“I envy him for being better than I,” said Levin. “He does not live for
himself. His whole life is subordinated to his duty. And that’s why he
can be calm and contented.”

“And you?” Kitty asked, with an ironical and loving smile.

She could never have explained the chain of thought that made her
smile; but the last link in it was that her husband, in exalting his
brother and abasing himself, was not quite sincere. Kitty knew that
this insincerity came from his love for his brother, from his sense of
shame at being too happy, and above all from his unflagging craving to
be better—she loved it in him, and so she smiled.

“And you? What are you dissatisfied with?” she asked, with the same
smile.

Her disbelief in his self-dissatisfaction delighted him, and
unconsciously he tried to draw her into giving utterance to the grounds
of her disbelief.

“I am happy, but dissatisfied with myself....” he said.

“Why, how can you be dissatisfied with yourself if you are happy?”

“Well, how shall I say?... In my heart I really care for nothing
whatever but that you should not stumble—see? Oh, but really you
mustn’t skip about like that!” he cried, breaking off to scold her for
too agile a movement in stepping over a branch that lay in the path.
“But when I think about myself, and compare myself with others,
especially with my brother, I feel I’m a poor creature.”

“But in what way?” Kitty pursued with the same smile. “Don’t you too
work for others? What about your co-operative settlement, and your work
on the estate, and your book?...”

“Oh, but I feel, and particularly just now—it’s your fault,” he said,
pressing her hand—“that all that doesn’t count. I do it in a way
halfheartedly. If I could care for all that as I care for you!...
Instead of that, I do it in these days like a task that is set me.”

“Well, what would you say about papa?” asked Kitty. “Is he a poor
creature then, as he does nothing for the public good?”

“He?—no! But then one must have the simplicity, the
straightforwardness, the goodness of your father: and I haven’t got
that. I do nothing, and I fret about it. It’s all your doing. Before
there was you—and _this_ too,” he added with a glance towards her waist
that she understood—“I put all my energies into work; now I can’t, and
I’m ashamed; I do it just as though it were a task set me, I’m
pretending....”

“Well, but would you like to change this minute with Sergey
Ivanovitch?” said Kitty. “Would you like to do this work for the
general good, and to love the task set you, as he does, and nothing
else?”

“Of course not,” said Levin. “But I’m so happy that I don’t understand
anything. So you think he’ll make her an offer today?” he added after a
brief silence.

“I think so, and I don’t think so. Only, I’m awfully anxious for it.
Here, wait a minute.” She stooped down and picked a wild camomile at
the edge of the path. “Come, count: he does propose, he doesn’t,” she
said, giving him the flower.

“He does, he doesn’t,” said Levin, tearing off the white petals.

“No, no!” Kitty, snatching at his hand, stopped him. She had been
watching his fingers with interest. “You picked off two.”

“Oh, but see, this little one shan’t count to make up,” said Levin,
tearing off a little half-grown petal. “Here’s the wagonette overtaking
us.”

“Aren’t you tired, Kitty?” called the princess.

“Not in the least.”

“If you are you can get in, as the horses are quiet and walking.”

But it was not worth while to get in, they were quite near the place,
and all walked on together.


Chapter 4

Varenka, with her white kerchief on her black hair, surrounded by the
children, gaily and good-humoredly looking after them, and at the same
time visibly excited at the possibility of receiving a declaration from
the man she cared for, was very attractive. Sergey Ivanovitch walked
beside her, and never left off admiring her. Looking at her, he
recalled all the delightful things he had heard from her lips, all the
good he knew about her, and became more and more conscious that the
feeling he had for her was something special that he had felt long,
long ago, and only once, in his early youth. The feeling of happiness
in being near her continually grew, and at last reached such a point
that, as he put a huge, slender-stalked agaric fungus in her basket, he
looked straight into her face, and noticing the flush of glad and
alarmed excitement that overspread her face, he was confused himself,
and smiled to her in silence a smile that said too much.

“If so,” he said to himself, “I ought to think it over and make up my
mind, and not give way like a boy to the impulse of a moment.”

“I’m going to pick by myself apart from all the rest, or else my
efforts will make no show,” he said, and he left the edge of the forest
where they were walking on low silky grass between old birch trees
standing far apart, and went more into the heart of the wood, where
between the white birch trunks there were gray trunks of aspen and dark
bushes of hazel. Walking some forty paces away, Sergey Ivanovitch,
knowing he was out of sight, stood still behind a bushy spindle-tree in
full flower with its rosy red catkins. It was perfectly still all round
him. Only overhead in the birches under which he stood, the flies, like
a swarm of bees, buzzed unceasingly, and from time to time the
children’s voices were floated across to him. All at once he heard, not
far from the edge of the wood, the sound of Varenka’s contralto voice,
calling Grisha, and a smile of delight passed over Sergey Ivanovitch’s
face. Conscious of this smile, he shook his head disapprovingly at his
own condition, and taking out a cigar, he began lighting it. For a long
while he could not get a match to light against the trunk of a birch
tree. The soft scales of the white bark rubbed off the phosphorus, and
the light went out. At last one of the matches burned, and the fragrant
cigar smoke, hovering uncertainly in flat, wide coils, stretched away
forwards and upwards over a bush under the overhanging branches of a
birch tree. Watching the streak of smoke, Sergey Ivanovitch walked
gently on, deliberating on his position.

“Why not?” he thought. “If it were only a passing fancy or a passion,
if it were only this attraction—this mutual attraction (I can call it a
_mutual_ attraction), but if I felt that it was in contradiction with
the whole bent of my life—if I felt that in giving way to this
attraction I should be false to my vocation and my duty ... but it’s
not so. The only thing I can say against it is that, when I lost Marie,
I said to myself that I would remain faithful to her memory. That’s the
only thing I can say against my feeling.... That’s a great thing,”
Sergey Ivanovitch said to himself, feeling at the same time that this
consideration had not the slightest importance for him personally, but
would only perhaps detract from his romantic character in the eyes of
others. “But apart from that, however much I searched, I should never
find anything to say against my feeling. If I were choosing by
considerations of suitability alone, I could not have found anything
better.”

However many women and girls he thought of whom he knew, he could not
think of a girl who united to such a degree all, positively all, the
qualities he would wish to see in his wife. She had all the charm and
freshness of youth, but she was not a child; and if she loved him, she
loved him consciously as a woman ought to love; that was one thing.
Another point: she was not only far from being worldly, but had an
unmistakable distaste for worldly society, and at the same time she
knew the world, and had all the ways of a woman of the best society,
which were absolutely essential to Sergey Ivanovitch’s conception of
the woman who was to share his life. Thirdly: she was religious, and
not like a child, unconsciously religious and good, as Kitty, for
example, was, but her life was founded on religious principles. Even in
trifling matters, Sergey Ivanovitch found in her all that he wanted in
his wife: she was poor and alone in the world, so she would not bring
with her a mass of relations and their influence into her husband’s
house, as he saw now in Kitty’s case. She would owe everything to her
husband, which was what he had always desired too for his future family
life. And this girl, who united all these qualities, loved him. He was
a modest man, but he could not help seeing it. And he loved her. There
was one consideration against it—his age. But he came of a long-lived
family, he had not a single gray hair, no one would have taken him for
forty, and he remembered Varenka’s saying that it was only in Russia
that men of fifty thought themselves old, and that in France a man of
fifty considers himself _dans la force de l’âge_, while a man of forty
is _un jeune homme_. But what did the mere reckoning of years matter
when he felt as young in heart as he had been twenty years ago? Was it
not youth to feel as he felt now, when coming from the other side to
the edge of the wood he saw in the glowing light of the slanting
sunbeams the gracious figure of Varenka in her yellow gown with her
basket, walking lightly by the trunk of an old birch tree, and when
this impression of the sight of Varenka blended so harmoniously with
the beauty of the view, of the yellow oatfield lying bathed in the
slanting sunshine, and beyond it the distant ancient forest flecked
with yellow and melting into the blue of the distance? His heart
throbbed joyously. A softened feeling came over him. He felt that he
had made up his mind. Varenka, who had just crouched down to pick a
mushroom, rose with a supple movement and looked round. Flinging away
the cigar, Sergey Ivanovitch advanced with resolute steps towards her.


Chapter 5

“Varvara Andreevna, when I was very young, I set before myself the
ideal of the woman I loved and should be happy to call my wife. I have
lived through a long life, and now for the first time I have met what I
sought—in you. I love you, and offer you my hand.”

Sergey Ivanovitch was saying this to himself while he was ten paces
from Varvara. Kneeling down, with her hands over the mushrooms to guard
them from Grisha, she was calling little Masha.

“Come here, little ones! There are so many!” she was saying in her
sweet, deep voice.

Seeing Sergey Ivanovitch approaching, she did not get up and did not
change her position, but everything told him that she felt his presence
and was glad of it.

“Well, did you find some?” she asked from under the white kerchief,
turning her handsome, gently smiling face to him.

“Not one,” said Sergey Ivanovitch. “Did you?”

She did not answer, busy with the children who thronged about her.

“That one too, near the twig,” she pointed out to little Masha a little
fungus, split in half across its rosy cap by the dry grass from under
which it thrust itself. Varenka got up while Masha picked the fungus,
breaking it into two white halves. “This brings back my childhood,” she
added, moving apart from the children beside Sergey Ivanovitch.

They walked on for some steps in silence. Varenka saw that he wanted to
speak; she guessed of what, and felt faint with joy and panic. They had
walked so far away that no one could hear them now, but still he did
not begin to speak. It would have been better for Varenka to be silent.
After a silence it would have been easier for them to say what they
wanted to say than after talking about mushrooms. But against her own
will, as it were accidentally, Varenka said:

“So you found nothing? In the middle of the wood there are always
fewer, though.” Sergey Ivanovitch sighed and made no answer. He was
annoyed that she had spoken about the mushrooms. He wanted to bring her
back to the first words she had uttered about her childhood; but after
a pause of some length, as though against his own will, he made an
observation in response to her last words.

“I have heard that the white edible funguses are found principally at
the edge of the wood, though I can’t tell them apart.”

Some minutes more passed, they moved still further away from the
children, and were quite alone. Varenka’s heart throbbed so that she
heard it beating, and felt that she was turning red and pale and red
again.

To be the wife of a man like Koznishev, after her position with Madame
Stahl, was to her imagination the height of happiness. Besides, she was
almost certain that she was in love with him. And this moment it would
have to be decided. She felt frightened. She dreaded both his speaking
and his not speaking.

Now or never it must be said—that Sergey Ivanovitch felt too.
Everything in the expression, the flushed cheeks and the downcast eyes
of Varenka betrayed a painful suspense. Sergey Ivanovitch saw it and
felt sorry for her. He felt even that to say nothing now would be a
slight to her. Rapidly in his own mind he ran over all the arguments in
support of his decision. He even said over to himself the words in
which he meant to put his offer, but instead of those words, some
utterly unexpected reflection that occurred to him made him ask:

“What is the difference between the ‘birch’ mushroom and the ‘white’
mushroom?”

Varenka’s lips quivered with emotion as she answered:

“In the top part there is scarcely any difference, it’s in the stalk.”

And as soon as these words were uttered, both he and she felt that it
was over, that what was to have been said would not be said; and their
emotion, which had up to then been continually growing more intense,
began to subside.

“The birch mushroom’s stalk suggests a dark man’s chin after two days
without shaving,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, speaking quite calmly now.

“Yes, that’s true,” answered Varenka smiling, and unconsciously the
direction of their walk changed. They began to turn towards the
children. Varenka felt both sore and ashamed; at the same time she had
a sense of relief.

When he had got home again and went over the whole subject, Sergey
Ivanovitch thought his previous decision had been a mistaken one. He
could not be false to the memory of Marie.

“Gently, children, gently!” Levin shouted quite angrily to the
children, standing before his wife to protect her when the crowd of
children flew with shrieks of delight to meet them.

Behind the children Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka walked out of the
wood. Kitty had no need to ask Varenka; she saw from the calm and
somewhat crestfallen faces of both that her plans had not come off.

“Well?” her husband questioned her as they were going home again.

“It doesn’t bite,” said Kitty, her smile and manner of speaking
recalling her father, a likeness Levin often noticed with pleasure.

“How doesn’t bite?”

“I’ll show you,” she said, taking her husband’s hand, lifting it to her
mouth, and just faintly brushing it with closed lips. “Like a kiss on a
priest’s hand.”

“Which didn’t it bite with?” he said, laughing.

“Both. But it should have been like this....”

“There are some peasants coming....”

“Oh, they didn’t see.”


Chapter 6

During the time of the children’s tea the grown-up people sat in the
balcony and talked as though nothing had happened, though they all,
especially Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka, were very well aware that
there had happened an event which, though negative, was of very great
importance. They both had the same feeling, rather like that of a
schoolboy after an examination, which has left him in the same class or
shut him out of the school forever. Everyone present, feeling too that
something had happened, talked eagerly about extraneous subjects. Levin
and Kitty were particularly happy and conscious of their love that
evening. And their happiness in their love seemed to imply a
disagreeable slur on those who would have liked to feel the same and
could not—and they felt a prick of conscience.

“Mark my words, Alexander will not come,” said the old princess.

That evening they were expecting Stepan Arkadyevitch to come down by
train, and the old prince had written that possibly he might come too.

“And I know why,” the princess went on; “he says that young people
ought to be left alone for a while at first.”

“But papa has left us alone. We’ve never seen him,” said Kitty.
“Besides, we’re not young people!—we’re old, married people by now.”

“Only if he doesn’t come, I shall say good-bye to you children,” said
the princess, sighing mournfully.

“What nonsense, mamma!” both the daughters fell upon her at once.

“How do you suppose he is feeling? Why, now....”

And suddenly there was an unexpected quiver in the princess’s voice.
Her daughters were silent, and looked at one another. “Maman always
finds something to be miserable about,” they said in that glance. They
did not know that happy as the princess was in her daughter’s house,
and useful as she felt herself to be there, she had been extremely
miserable, both on her own account and her husband’s, ever since they
had married their last and favorite daughter, and the old home had been
left empty.

“What is it, Agafea Mihalovna?” Kitty asked suddenly of Agafea
Mihalovna, who was standing with a mysterious air, and a face full of
meaning.

“About supper.”

“Well, that’s right,” said Dolly; “you go and arrange about it, and
I’ll go and hear Grisha repeat his lesson, or else he will have nothing
done all day.”

“That’s my lesson! No, Dolly, I’m going,” said Levin, jumping up.

Grisha, who was by now at a high school, had to go over the lessons of
the term in the summer holidays. Darya Alexandrovna, who had been
studying Latin with her son in Moscow before, had made it a rule on
coming to the Levins’ to go over with him, at least once a day, the
most difficult lessons of Latin and arithmetic. Levin had offered to
take her place, but the mother, having once overheard Levin’s lesson,
and noticing that it was not given exactly as the teacher in Moscow had
given it, said resolutely, though with much embarrassment and anxiety
not to mortify Levin, that they must keep strictly to the book as the
teacher had done, and that she had better undertake it again herself.
Levin was amazed both at Stepan Arkadyevitch, who, by neglecting his
duty, threw upon the mother the supervision of studies of which she had
no comprehension, and at the teachers for teaching the children so
badly. But he promised his sister-in-law to give the lessons exactly as
she wished. And he went on teaching Grisha, not in his own way, but by
the book, and so took little interest in it, and often forgot the hour
of the lesson. So it had been today.

“No, I’m going, Dolly, you sit still,” he said. “We’ll do it all
properly, like the book. Only when Stiva comes, and we go out shooting,
then we shall have to miss it.”

And Levin went to Grisha.

Varenka was saying the same thing to Kitty. Even in the happy,
well-ordered household of the Levins Varenka had succeeded in making
herself useful.

“I’ll see to the supper, you sit still,” she said, and got up to go to
Agafea Mihalovna.

“Yes, yes, most likely they’ve not been able to get chickens. If so,
ours....”

“Agafea Mihalovna and I will see about it,” and Varenka vanished with
her.

“What a nice girl!” said the princess.

“Not nice, maman; she’s an exquisite girl; there’s no one else like
her.”

“So you are expecting Stepan Arkadyevitch today?” said Sergey
Ivanovitch, evidently not disposed to pursue the conversation about
Varenka. “It would be difficult to find two sons-in-law more unlike
than yours,” he said with a subtle smile. “One all movement, only
living in society, like a fish in water; the other our Kostya, lively,
alert, quick in everything, but as soon as he is in society, he either
sinks into apathy, or struggles helplessly like a fish on land.”

“Yes, he’s very heedless,” said the princess, addressing Sergey
Ivanovitch. “I’ve been meaning, indeed, to ask you to tell him that
it’s out of the question for her” (she indicated Kitty) “to stay here;
that she positively must come to Moscow. He talks of getting a doctor
down....”

“Maman, he’ll do everything; he has agreed to everything,” Kitty said,
angry with her mother for appealing to Sergey Ivanovitch to judge in
such a matter.

In the middle of their conversation they heard the snorting of horses
and the sound of wheels on the gravel. Dolly had not time to get up to
go and meet her husband, when from the window of the room below, where
Grisha was having his lesson, Levin leaped out and helped Grisha out
after him.

“It’s Stiva!” Levin shouted from under the balcony. “We’ve finished,
Dolly, don’t be afraid!” he added, and started running like a boy to
meet the carriage.

“_Is ea id, ejus, ejus, ejus!_” shouted Grisha, skipping along the
avenue.

“And someone else too! Papa, of course!” cried Levin, stopping at the
entrance of the avenue. “Kitty, don’t come down the steep staircase, go
round.”

But Levin had been mistaken in taking the person sitting in the
carriage for the old prince. As he got nearer to the carriage he saw
beside Stepan Arkadyevitch not the prince but a handsome, stout young
man in a Scotch cap, with long ends of ribbon behind. This was Vassenka
Veslovsky, a distant cousin of the Shtcherbatskys, a brilliant young
gentleman in Petersburg and Moscow society. “A capital fellow, and a
keen sportsman,” as Stepan Arkadyevitch said, introducing him.

Not a whit abashed by the disappointment caused by his having come in
place of the old prince, Veslovsky greeted Levin gaily, claiming
acquaintance with him in the past, and snatching up Grisha into the
carriage, lifted him over the pointer that Stepan Arkadyevitch had
brought with him.

Levin did not get into the carriage, but walked behind. He was rather
vexed at the non-arrival of the old prince, whom he liked more and more
the more he saw of him, and also at the arrival of this Vassenka
Veslovsky, a quite uncongenial and superfluous person. He seemed to him
still more uncongenial and superfluous when, on approaching the steps
where the whole party, children and grown-up, were gathered together in
much excitement, Levin saw Vassenka Veslovsky, with a particularly warm
and gallant air, kissing Kitty’s hand.

“Your wife and I are cousins and very old friends,” said Vassenka
Veslovsky, once more shaking Levin’s hand with great warmth.

“Well, are there plenty of birds?” Stepan Arkadyevitch said to Levin,
hardly leaving time for everyone to utter their greetings. “We’ve come
with the most savage intentions. Why, maman, they’ve not been in Moscow
since! Look, Tanya, here’s something for you! Get it, please, it’s in
the carriage, behind!” he talked in all directions. “How pretty you’ve
grown, Dolly,” he said to his wife, once more kissing her hand, holding
it in one of his, and patting it with the other.

Levin, who a minute before had been in the happiest frame of mind, now
looked darkly at everyone, and everything displeased him.

“Who was it he kissed yesterday with those lips?” he thought, looking
at Stepan Arkadyevitch’s tender demonstrations to his wife. He looked
at Dolly, and he did not like her either.

“She doesn’t believe in his love. So what is she so pleased about?
Revolting!” thought Levin.

He looked at the princess, who had been so dear to him a minute before,
and he did not like the manner in which she welcomed this Vassenka,
with his ribbons, just as though she were in her own house.

Even Sergey Ivanovitch, who had come out too onto the steps, seemed to
him unpleasant with the show of cordiality with which he met Stepan
Arkadyevitch, though Levin knew that his brother neither liked nor
respected Oblonsky.

And Varenka, even she seemed hateful, with her air _sainte nitouche_
making the acquaintance of this gentleman, while all the while she was
thinking of nothing but getting married.

And more hateful than anyone was Kitty for falling in with the tone of
gaiety with which this gentleman regarded his visit in the country, as
though it were a holiday for himself and everyone else. And, above all,
unpleasant was that particular smile with which she responded to his
smile.

Noisily talking, they all went into the house; but as soon as they were
all seated, Levin turned and went out.

Kitty saw something was wrong with her husband. She tried to seize a
moment to speak to him alone, but he made haste to get away from her,
saying he was wanted at the counting-house. It was long since his own
work on the estate had seemed to him so important as at that moment.
“It’s all holiday for them,” he thought; “but these are no holiday
matters, they won’t wait, and there’s no living without them.”


Chapter 7

Levin came back to the house only when they sent to summon him to
supper. On the stairs were standing Kitty and Agafea Mihalovna,
consulting about wines for supper.

“But why are you making all this fuss? Have what we usually do.”

“No, Stiva doesn’t drink ... Kostya, stop, what’s the matter?” Kitty
began, hurrying after him, but he strode ruthlessly away to the
dining-room without waiting for her, and at once joined in the lively
general conversation which was being maintained there by Vassenka
Veslovsky and Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“Well, what do you say, are we going shooting tomorrow?” said Stepan
Arkadyevitch.

“Please, do let’s go,” said Veslovsky, moving to another chair, where
he sat down sideways, with one fat leg crossed under him.

“I shall be delighted, we will go. And have you had any shooting yet
this year?” said Levin to Veslovsky, looking intently at his leg, but
speaking with that forced amiability that Kitty knew so well in him,
and that was so out of keeping with him. “I can’t answer for our
finding grouse, but there are plenty of snipe. Only we ought to start
early. You’re not tired? Aren’t you tired, Stiva?”

“Me tired? I’ve never been tired yet. Suppose we stay up all night.
Let’s go for a walk!”

“Yes, really, let’s not go to bed at all! Capital!” Veslovsky chimed
in.

“Oh, we all know you can do without sleep, and keep other people up
too,” Dolly said to her husband, with that faint note of irony in her
voice which she almost always had now with her husband. “But to my
thinking, it’s time for bed now.... I’m going, I don’t want supper.”

“No, do stay a little, Dolly,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, going round to
her side behind the table where they were having supper. “I’ve so much
still to tell you.”

“Nothing really, I suppose.”

“Do you know Veslovsky has been at Anna’s, and he’s going to them
again? You know they’re hardly fifty miles from you, and I too must
certainly go over there. Veslovsky, come here!”

Vassenka crossed over to the ladies, and sat down beside Kitty.

“Ah, do tell me, please; you have stayed with her? How was she?” Darya
Alexandrovna appealed to him.

Levin was left at the other end of the table, and though never pausing
in his conversation with the princess and Varenka, he saw that there
was an eager and mysterious conversation going on between Stepan
Arkadyevitch, Dolly, Kitty, and Veslovsky. And that was not all. He saw
on his wife’s face an expression of real feeling as she gazed with
fixed eyes on the handsome face of Vassenka, who was telling them
something with great animation.

“It’s exceedingly nice at their place,” Veslovsky was telling them
about Vronsky and Anna. “I can’t, of course, take it upon myself to
judge, but in their house you feel the real feeling of home.”

“What do they intend doing?”

“I believe they think of going to Moscow.”

“How jolly it would be for us all to go over to them together! When are
you going there?” Stepan Arkadyevitch asked Vassenka.

“I’m spending July there.”

“Will you go?” Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his wife.

“I’ve been wanting to a long while; I shall certainly go,” said Dolly.
“I am sorry for her, and I know her. She’s a splendid woman. I will go
alone, when you go back, and then I shall be in no one’s way. And it
will be better indeed without you.”

“To be sure,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “And you, Kitty?”

“I? Why should I go?” Kitty said, flushing all over, and she glanced
round at her husband.

“Do you know Anna Arkadyevna, then?” Veslovsky asked her. “She’s a very
fascinating woman.”

“Yes,” she answered Veslovsky, crimsoning still more. She got up and
walked across to her husband.

“Are you going shooting, then, tomorrow?” she said.

His jealousy had in these few moments, especially at the flush that had
overspread her cheeks while she was talking to Veslovsky, gone far
indeed. Now as he heard her words, he construed them in his own
fashion. Strange as it was to him afterwards to recall it, it seemed to
him at the moment clear that in asking whether he was going shooting,
all she cared to know was whether he would give that pleasure to
Vassenka Veslovsky, with whom, as he fancied, she was in love.

“Yes, I’m going,” he answered her in an unnatural voice, disagreeable
to himself.

“No, better spend the day here tomorrow, or Dolly won’t see anything of
her husband, and set off the day after,” said Kitty.

The motive of Kitty’s words was interpreted by Levin thus: “Don’t
separate me from _him_. I don’t care about _your_ going, but do let me
enjoy the society of this delightful young man.”

“Oh, if you wish, we’ll stay here tomorrow,” Levin answered, with
peculiar amiability.

Vassenka meanwhile, utterly unsuspecting the misery his presence had
occasioned, got up from the table after Kitty, and watching her with
smiling and admiring eyes, he followed her.

Levin saw that look. He turned white, and for a minute he could hardly
breathe. “How dare he look at my wife like that!” was the feeling that
boiled within him.

“Tomorrow, then? Do, please, let us go,” said Vassenka, sitting down on
a chair, and again crossing his leg as his habit was.

Levin’s jealousy went further still. Already he saw himself a deceived
husband, looked upon by his wife and her lover as simply necessary to
provide them with the conveniences and pleasures of life.... But in
spite of that he made polite and hospitable inquiries of Vassenka about
his shooting, his gun, and his boots, and agreed to go shooting next
day.

Happily for Levin, the old princess cut short his agonies by getting up
herself and advising Kitty to go to bed. But even at this point Levin
could not escape another agony. As he said good-night to his hostess,
Vassenka would again have kissed her hand, but Kitty, reddening, drew
back her hand and said with a naïve bluntness, for which the old
princess scolded her afterwards:

“We don’t like that fashion.”

In Levin’s eyes she was to blame for having allowed such relations to
arise, and still more to blame for showing so awkwardly that she did
not like them.

“Why, how can one want to go to bed!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who,
after drinking several glasses of wine at supper, was now in his most
charming and sentimental humor. “Look, Kitty,” he said, pointing to the
moon, which had just risen behind the lime trees—“how exquisite!
Veslovsky, this is the time for a serenade. You know, he has a splendid
voice; we practiced songs together along the road. He has brought some
lovely songs with him, two new ones. Varvara Andreevna and he must sing
some duets.”

When the party had broken up, Stepan Arkadyevitch walked a long while
about the avenue with Veslovsky; their voices could be heard singing
one of the new songs.

Levin hearing these voices sat scowling in an easy-chair in his wife’s
bedroom, and maintained an obstinate silence when she asked him what
was wrong. But when at last with a timid glance she hazarded the
question: “Was there perhaps something you disliked about
Veslovsky?”—it all burst out, and he told her all. He was humiliated
himself at what he was saying, and that exasperated him all the more.

He stood facing her with his eyes glittering menacingly under his
scowling brows, and he squeezed his strong arms across his chest, as
though he were straining every nerve to hold himself in. The expression
of his face would have been grim, and even cruel, if it had not at the
same time had a look of suffering which touched her. His jaws were
twitching, and his voice kept breaking.

“You must understand that I’m not jealous, that’s a nasty word. I can’t
be jealous, and believe that.... I can’t say what I feel, but this is
awful.... I’m not jealous, but I’m wounded, humiliated that anybody
dare think, that anybody dare look at you with eyes like that.”

“Eyes like what?” said Kitty, trying as conscientiously as possible to
recall every word and gesture of that evening and every shade implied
in them.

At the very bottom of her heart she did think there had been something
precisely at the moment when he had crossed over after her to the other
end of the table; but she dared not own it even to herself, and would
have been even more unable to bring herself to say so to him, and so
increase his suffering.

“And what can there possibly be attractive about me as I am now?...”

“Ah!” he cried, clutching at his head, “you shouldn’t say that!... If
you had been attractive then....”

“Oh, no, Kostya, oh, wait a minute, oh, do listen!” she said, looking
at him with an expression of pained commiseration. “Why, what can you
be thinking about! When for me there’s no one in the world, no one, no
one!... Would you like me never to see anyone?”

For the first minute she had been offended at his jealousy; she was
angry that the slightest amusement, even the most innocent, should be
forbidden her; but now she would readily have sacrificed, not merely
such trifles, but everything, for his peace of mind, to save him from
the agony he was suffering.

“You must understand the horror and comedy of my position,” he went on
in a desperate whisper; “that he’s in my house, that he’s done nothing
improper positively except his free and easy airs and the way he sits
on his legs. He thinks it’s the best possible form, and so I’m obliged
to be civil to him.”

“But, Kostya, you’re exaggerating,” said Kitty, at the bottom of her
heart rejoicing at the depth of his love for her, shown now in his
jealousy.

“The most awful part of it all is that you’re just as you always are,
and especially now when to me you’re something sacred, and we’re so
happy, so particularly happy—and all of a sudden a little wretch....
He’s not a little wretch; why should I abuse him? I have nothing to do
with him. But why should my, and your, happiness....”

“Do you know, I understand now what it’s all come from,” Kitty was
beginning.

“Well, what? what?”

“I saw how you looked while we were talking at supper.”

“Well, well!” Levin said in dismay.

She told him what they had been talking about. And as she told him, she
was breathless with emotion. Levin was silent for a space, then he
scanned her pale and distressed face, and suddenly he clutched at his
head.

“Katya, I’ve been worrying you! Darling, forgive me! It’s madness!
Katya, I’m a criminal. And how could you be so distressed at such
idiocy?”

“Oh, I was sorry for you.”

“For me? for me? How mad I am!... But why make you miserable? It’s
awful to think that any outsider can shatter our happiness.”

“It’s humiliating too, of course.”

“Oh, then I’ll keep him here all the summer, and will overwhelm him
with civility,” said Levin, kissing her hands. “You shall see.
Tomorrow.... Oh, yes, we are going tomorrow.”


Chapter 8

Next day, before the ladies were up, the wagonette and a trap for the
shooting party were at the door, and Laska, aware since early morning
that they were going shooting, after much whining and darting to and
fro, had sat herself down in the wagonette beside the coachman, and,
disapproving of the delay, was excitedly watching the door from which
the sportsmen still did not come out. The first to come out was
Vassenka Veslovsky, in new high boots that reached half-way up his
thick thighs, in a green blouse, with a new Russian leather
cartridge-belt, and in his Scotch cap with ribbons, with a brand-new
English gun without a sling. Laska flew up to him, welcomed him, and
jumping up, asked him in her own way whether the others were coming
soon, but getting no answer from him, she returned to her post of
observation and sank into repose again, her head on one side, and one
ear pricked up to listen. At last the door opened with a creak, and
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s spot-and-tan pointer Krak flew out, running round
and round and turning over in the air. Stepan Arkadyevitch himself
followed with a gun in his hand and a cigar in his mouth.

“Good dog, good dog, Krak!” he cried encouragingly to the dog, who put
his paws up on his chest, catching at his game bag. Stepan Arkadyevitch
was dressed in rough leggings and spats, in torn trousers and a short
coat. On his head there was a wreck of a hat of indefinite form, but
his gun of a new patent was a perfect gem, and his game bag and
cartridge belt, though worn, were of the very best quality.

Vassenka Veslovsky had had no notion before that it was truly _chic_
for a sportsman to be in tatters, but to have his shooting outfit of
the best quality. He saw it now as he looked at Stepan Arkadyevitch,
radiant in his rags, graceful, well-fed, and joyous, a typical Russian
nobleman. And he made up his mind that next time he went shooting he
would certainly adopt the same get-up.

“Well, and what about our host?” he asked.

“A young wife,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.

“Yes, and such a charming one!”

“He came down dressed. No doubt he’s run up to her again.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch guessed right. Levin had run up again to his wife
to ask her once more if she forgave him for his idiocy yesterday, and,
moreover, to beg her for Christ’s sake to be more careful. The great
thing was for her to keep away from the children—they might any minute
push against her. Then he had once more to hear her declare that she
was not angry with him for going away for two days, and to beg her to
be sure to send him a note next morning by a servant on horseback, to
write him, if it were but two words only, to let him know that all was
well with her.

Kitty was distressed, as she always was, at parting for a couple of
days from her husband, but when she saw his eager figure, looking big
and strong in his shooting-boots and his white blouse, and a sort of
sportsman elation and excitement incomprehensible to her, she forgot
her own chagrin for the sake of his pleasure, and said good-bye to him
cheerfully.

“Pardon, gentlemen!” he said, running out onto the steps. “Have you put
the lunch in? Why is the chestnut on the right? Well, it doesn’t
matter. Laska, down; go and lie down!”

“Put it with the herd of oxen,” he said to the herdsman, who was
waiting for him at the steps with some question. “Excuse me, here comes
another villain.”

Levin jumped out of the wagonette, in which he had already taken his
seat, to meet the carpenter, who came towards the steps with a rule in
his hand.

“You didn’t come to the counting house yesterday, and now you’re
detaining me. Well, what is it?”

“Would your honor let me make another turning? It’s only three steps to
add. And we make it just fit at the same time. It will be much more
convenient.”

“You should have listened to me,” Levin answered with annoyance. “I
said: Put the lines and then fit in the steps. Now there’s no setting
it right. Do as I told you, and make a new staircase.”

The point was that in the lodge that was being built the carpenter had
spoiled the staircase, fitting it together without calculating the
space it was to fill, so that the steps were all sloping when it was
put in place. Now the carpenter wanted, keeping the same staircase, to
add three steps.

“It will be much better.”

“But where’s your staircase coming out with its three steps?”

“Why, upon my word, sir,” the carpenter said with a contemptuous smile.
“It comes out right at the very spot. It starts, so to speak,” he said,
with a persuasive gesture; “it comes down, and comes down, and comes
out.”

“But three steps will add to the length too ... where is it to come
out?”

“Why, to be sure, it’ll start from the bottom and go up and go up, and
come out so,” the carpenter said obstinately and convincingly.

“It’ll reach the ceiling and the wall.”

“Upon my word! Why, it’ll go up, and up, and come out like this.”

Levin took out a ramrod and began sketching him the staircase in the
dust.

“There, do you see?”

“As your honor likes,” said the carpenter, with a sudden gleam in his
eyes, obviously understanding the thing at last. “It seems it’ll be
best to make a new one.”

“Well, then, do it as you’re told,” Levin shouted, seating himself in
the wagonette. “Down! Hold the dogs, Philip!”

Levin felt now at leaving behind all his family and household cares
such an eager sense of joy in life and expectation that he was not
disposed to talk. Besides that, he had that feeling of concentrated
excitement that every sportsman experiences as he approaches the scene
of action. If he had anything on his mind at that moment, it was only
the doubt whether they would start anything in the Kolpensky marsh,
whether Laska would show to advantage in comparison with Krak, and
whether he would shoot well that day himself. Not to disgrace himself
before a new spectator—not to be outdone by Oblonsky—that too was a
thought that crossed his brain.

Oblonsky was feeling the same, and he too was not talkative. Vassenka
Veslovsky kept up alone a ceaseless flow of cheerful chatter. As he
listened to him now, Levin felt ashamed to think how unfair he had been
to him the day before. Vassenka was really a nice fellow, simple,
good-hearted, and very good-humored. If Levin had met him before he was
married, he would have made friends with him. Levin rather disliked his
holiday attitude to life and a sort of free and easy assumption of
elegance. It was as though he assumed a high degree of importance in
himself that could not be disputed, because he had long nails and a
stylish cap, and everything else to correspond; but this could be
forgiven for the sake of his good nature and good breeding. Levin liked
him for his good education, for speaking French and English with such
an excellent accent, and for being a man of his world.

Vassenka was extremely delighted with the left horse, a horse of the
Don Steppes. He kept praising him enthusiastically. “How fine it must
be galloping over the steppes on a steppe horse! Eh? isn’t it?” he
said. He had imagined riding on a steppe horse as something wild and
romantic, and it turned out nothing of the sort. But his simplicity,
particularly in conjunction with his good looks, his amiable smile, and
the grace of his movements, was very attractive. Either because his
nature was sympathetic to Levin, or because Levin was trying to atone
for his sins of the previous evening by seeing nothing but what was
good in him, anyway he liked his society.

After they had driven over two miles from home, Veslovsky all at once
felt for a cigar and his pocketbook, and did not know whether he had
lost them or left them on the table. In the pocketbook there were
thirty-seven pounds, and so the matter could not be left in
uncertainty.

“Do you know what, Levin, I’ll gallop home on that left trace-horse.
That will be splendid. Eh?” he said, preparing to get out.

“No, why should you?” answered Levin, calculating that Vassenka could
hardly weigh less than seventeen stone. “I’ll send the coachman.”

The coachman rode back on the trace-horse, and Levin himself drove the
remaining pair.


Chapter 9

“Well, now what’s our plan of campaign? Tell us all about it,” said
Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“Our plan is this. Now we’re driving to Gvozdyov. In Gvozdyov there’s a
grouse marsh on this side, and beyond Gvozdyov come some magnificent
snipe marshes where there are grouse too. It’s hot now, and we’ll get
there—it’s fifteen miles or so—towards evening and have some evening
shooting; we’ll spend the night there and go on tomorrow to the bigger
moors.”

“And is there nothing on the way?”

“Yes; but we’ll reserve ourselves; besides it’s hot. There are two nice
little places, but I doubt there being anything to shoot.”

Levin would himself have liked to go into these little places, but they
were near home; he could shoot them over any time, and they were only
little places—there would hardly be room for three to shoot. And so,
with some insincerity, he said that he doubted there being anything to
shoot. When they reached a little marsh Levin would have driven by, but
Stepan Arkadyevitch, with the experienced eye of a sportsman, at once
detected reeds visible from the road.

“Shan’t we try that?” he said, pointing to the little marsh.

“Levin, do, please! how delightful!” Vassenka Veslovsky began begging,
and Levin could but consent.

Before they had time to stop, the dogs had flown one before the other
into the marsh.

“Krak! Laska!...”

The dogs came back.

“There won’t be room for three. I’ll stay here,” said Levin, hoping
they would find nothing but peewits, who had been startled by the dogs,
and turning over in their flight, were plaintively wailing over the
marsh.

“No! Come along, Levin, let’s go together!” Veslovsky called.

“Really, there’s not room. Laska, back, Laska! You won’t want another
dog, will you?”

Levin remained with the wagonette, and looked enviously at the
sportsmen. They walked right across the marsh. Except little birds and
peewits, of which Vassenka killed one, there was nothing in the marsh.

“Come, you see now that it was not that I grudged the marsh,” said
Levin, “only it’s wasting time.”

“Oh, no, it was jolly all the same. Did you see us?” said Vassenka
Veslovsky, clambering awkwardly into the wagonette with his gun and his
peewit in his hands. “How splendidly I shot this bird! Didn’t I? Well,
shall we soon be getting to the real place?”

The horses started off suddenly, Levin knocked his head against the
stock of someone’s gun, and there was the report of a shot. The gun did
actually go off first, but that was how it seemed to Levin. It appeared
that Vassenka Veslovsky had pulled only one trigger, and had left the
other hammer still cocked. The charge flew into the ground without
doing harm to anyone. Stepan Arkadyevitch shook his head and laughed
reprovingly at Veslovsky. But Levin had not the heart to reprove him.
In the first place, any reproach would have seemed to be called forth
by the danger he had incurred and the bump that had come up on Levin’s
forehead. And besides, Veslovsky was at first so naïvely distressed,
and then laughed so good-humoredly and infectiously at their general
dismay, that one could not but laugh with him.

When they reached the second marsh, which was fairly large, and would
inevitably take some time to shoot over, Levin tried to persuade them
to pass it by. But Veslovsky again overpersuaded him. Again, as the
marsh was narrow, Levin, like a good host, remained with the carriage.

Krak made straight for some clumps of sedge. Vassenka Veslovsky was the
first to run after the dog. Before Stepan Arkadyevitch had time to come
up, a grouse flew out. Veslovsky missed it and it flew into an unmown
meadow. This grouse was left for Veslovsky to follow up. Krak found it
again and pointed, and Veslovsky shot it and went back to the carriage.
“Now you go and I’ll stay with the horses,” he said.

Levin had begun to feel the pangs of a sportsman’s envy. He handed the
reins to Veslovsky and walked into the marsh.

Laska, who had been plaintively whining and fretting against the
injustice of her treatment, flew straight ahead to a hopeful place that
Levin knew well, and that Krak had not yet come upon.

“Why don’t you stop her?” shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“She won’t scare them,” answered Levin, sympathizing with his bitch’s
pleasure and hurrying after her.

As she came nearer and nearer to the familiar breeding places there was
more and more earnestness in Laska’s exploration. A little marsh bird
did not divert her attention for more than an instant. She made one
circuit round the clump of reeds, was beginning a second, and suddenly
quivered with excitement and became motionless.

“Come, come, Stiva!” shouted Levin, feeling his heart beginning to beat
more violently; and all of a sudden, as though some sort of shutter had
been drawn back from his straining ears, all sounds, confused but loud,
began to beat on his hearing, losing all sense of distance. He heard
the steps of Stepan Arkadyevitch, mistaking them for the tramp of the
horses in the distance; he heard the brittle sound of the twigs on
which he had trodden, taking this sound for the flying of a grouse. He
heard too, not far behind him, a splashing in the water, which he could
not explain to himself.

Picking his steps, he moved up to the dog.

“Fetch it!”

Not a grouse but a snipe flew up from beside the dog. Levin had lifted
his gun, but at the very instant when he was taking aim, the sound of
splashing grew louder, came closer, and was joined with the sound of
Veslovsky’s voice, shouting something with strange loudness. Levin saw
he had his gun pointed behind the snipe, but still he fired.

When he had made sure he had missed, Levin looked round and saw the
horses and the wagonette not on the road but in the marsh.

Veslovsky, eager to see the shooting, had driven into the marsh, and
got the horses stuck in the mud.

“Damn the fellow!” Levin said to himself, as he went back to the
carriage that had sunk in the mire. “What did you drive in for?” he
said to him dryly, and calling the coachman, he began pulling the
horses out.

Levin was vexed both at being hindered from shooting and at his horses
getting stuck in the mud, and still more at the fact that neither
Stepan Arkadyevitch nor Veslovsky helped him and the coachman to
unharness the horses and get them out, since neither of them had the
slightest notion of harnessing. Without vouchsafing a syllable in reply
to Vassenka’s protestations that it had been quite dry there, Levin
worked in silence with the coachman at extricating the horses. But
then, as he got warm at the work and saw how assiduously Veslovsky was
tugging at the wagonette by one of the mud-guards, so that he broke it
indeed, Levin blamed himself for having under the influence of
yesterday’s feelings been too cold to Veslovsky, and tried to be
particularly genial so as to smooth over his chilliness. When
everything had been put right, and the carriage had been brought back
to the road, Levin had the lunch served.

“_Bon appétit—bonne conscience! Ce poulet va tomber jusqu’au fond de
mes bottes_,” Vassenka, who had recovered his spirits, quoted the
French saying as he finished his second chicken. “Well, now our
troubles are over, now everything’s going to go well. Only, to atone
for my sins, I’m bound to sit on the box. That’s so? eh? No, no! I’ll
be your Automedon. You shall see how I’ll get you along,” he answered,
not letting go the rein, when Levin begged him to let the coachman
drive. “No, I must atone for my sins, and I’m very comfortable on the
box.” And he drove.

Levin was a little afraid he would exhaust the horses, especially the
chestnut, whom he did not know how to hold in; but unconsciously he
fell under the influence of his gaiety and listened to the songs he
sang all the way on the box, or the descriptions and representations he
gave of driving in the English fashion, four-in-hand; and it was in the
very best of spirits that after lunch they drove to the Gvozdyov marsh.


Chapter 10

Vassenka drove the horses so smartly that they reached the marsh too
early, while it was still hot.

As they drew near this more important marsh, the chief aim of their
expedition, Levin could not help considering how he could get rid of
Vassenka and be free in his movements. Stepan Arkadyevitch evidently
had the same desire, and on his face Levin saw the look of anxiety
always present in a true sportsman when beginning shooting, together
with a certain good-humored slyness peculiar to him.

“How shall we go? It’s a splendid marsh, I see, and there are hawks,”
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pointing to two great birds hovering over the
reeds. “Where there are hawks, there is sure to be game.”

“Now, gentlemen,” said Levin, pulling up his boots and examining the
lock of his gun with rather a gloomy expression, “do you see those
reeds?” He pointed to an oasis of blackish green in the huge half-mown
wet meadow that stretched along the right bank of the river. “The marsh
begins here, straight in front of us, do you see—where it is greener?
From here it runs to the right where the horses are; there are breeding
places there, and grouse, and all round those reeds as far as that
alder, and right up to the mill. Over there, do you see, where the
pools are? That’s the best place. There I once shot seventeen snipe.
We’ll separate with the dogs and go in different directions, and then
meet over there at the mill.”

“Well, which shall go to left and which to right?” asked Stepan
Arkadyevitch. “It’s wider to the right; you two go that way and I’ll
take the left,” he said with apparent carelessness.

“Capital! we’ll make the bigger bag! Yes, come along, come along!”
Vassenka exclaimed.

Levin could do nothing but agree, and they divided.

As soon as they entered the marsh, the two dogs began hunting about
together and made towards the green, slime-covered pool. Levin knew
Laska’s method, wary and indefinite; he knew the place too and expected
a whole covey of snipe.

“Veslovsky, beside me, walk beside me!” he said in a faint voice to his
companion splashing in the water behind him. Levin could not help
feeling an interest in the direction his gun was pointed, after that
casual shot near the Kolpensky marsh.

“Oh, I won’t get in your way, don’t trouble about me.”

But Levin could not help troubling, and recalled Kitty’s words at
parting: “Mind you don’t shoot one another.” The dogs came nearer and
nearer, passed each other, each pursuing its own scent. The expectation
of snipe was so intense that to Levin the squelching sound of his own
heel, as he drew it up out of the mire, seemed to be the call of a
snipe, and he clutched and pressed the lock of his gun.

“Bang! bang!” sounded almost in his ear. Vassenka had fired at a flock
of ducks which was hovering over the marsh and flying at that moment
towards the sportsmen, far out of range. Before Levin had time to look
round, there was the whir of one snipe, another, a third, and some
eight more rose one after another.

Stepan Arkadyevitch hit one at the very moment when it was beginning
its zigzag movements, and the snipe fell in a heap into the mud.
Oblonsky aimed deliberately at another, still flying low in the reeds,
and together with the report of the shot, that snipe too fell, and it
could be seen fluttering out where the sedge had been cut, its unhurt
wing showing white beneath.

Levin was not so lucky: he aimed at his first bird too low, and missed;
he aimed at it again, just as it was rising, but at that instant
another snipe flew up at his very feet, distracting him so that he
missed again.

While they were loading their guns, another snipe rose, and Veslovsky,
who had had time to load again, sent two charges of small-shot into the
water. Stepan Arkadyevitch picked up his snipe, and with sparkling eyes
looked at Levin.

“Well, now let us separate,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and limping on
his left foot, holding his gun in readiness and whistling to his dog,
he walked off in one direction. Levin and Veslovsky walked in the
other.

It always happened with Levin that when his first shots were a failure
he got hot and out of temper, and shot badly the whole day. So it was
that day. The snipe showed themselves in numbers. They kept flying up
from just under the dogs, from under the sportsmen’s legs, and Levin
might have retrieved his ill luck. But the more he shot, the more he
felt disgraced in the eyes of Veslovsky, who kept popping away merrily
and indiscriminately, killing nothing, and not in the slightest abashed
by his ill success. Levin, in feverish haste, could not restrain
himself, got more and more out of temper, and ended by shooting almost
without a hope of hitting. Laska, indeed, seemed to understand this.
She began looking more languidly, and gazed back at the sportsmen, as
it were, with perplexity or reproach in her eyes. Shots followed shots
in rapid succession. The smoke of the powder hung about the sportsmen,
while in the great roomy net of the game bag there were only three
light little snipe. And of these one had been killed by Veslovsky
alone, and one by both of them together. Meanwhile from the other side
of the marsh came the sound of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s shots, not
frequent, but, as Levin fancied, well-directed, for almost after each
they heard “Krak, Krak, _apporte_!”

This excited Levin still more. The snipe were floating continually in
the air over the reeds. Their whirring wings close to the earth, and
their harsh cries high in the air, could be heard on all sides; the
snipe that had risen first and flown up into the air, settled again
before the sportsmen. Instead of two hawks there were now dozens of
them hovering with shrill cries over the marsh.

After walking through the larger half of the marsh, Levin and Veslovsky
reached the place where the peasants’ mowing-grass was divided into
long strips reaching to the reeds, marked off in one place by the
trampled grass, in another by a path mown through it. Half of these
strips had already been mown.

Though there was not so much hope of finding birds in the uncut part as
the cut part, Levin had promised Stepan Arkadyevitch to meet him, and
so he walked on with his companion through the cut and uncut patches.

“Hi, sportsmen!” shouted one of a group of peasants, sitting on an
unharnessed cart; “come and have some lunch with us! Have a drop of
wine!”

Levin looked round.

“Come along, it’s all right!” shouted a good-humored-looking bearded
peasant with a red face, showing his white teeth in a grin, and holding
up a greenish bottle that flashed in the sunlight.

“_Qu’est-ce qu’ils disent_?” asked Veslovsky.

“They invite you to have some vodka. Most likely they’ve been dividing
the meadow into lots. I should have some,” said Levin, not without some
guile, hoping Veslovsky would be tempted by the vodka, and would go
away to them.

“Why do they offer it?”

“Oh, they’re merry-making. Really, you should join them. You would be
interested.”

“_Allons, c’est curieux_.”

“You go, you go, you’ll find the way to the mill!” cried Levin, and
looking round he perceived with satisfaction that Veslovsky, bent and
stumbling with weariness, holding his gun out at arm’s length, was
making his way out of the marsh towards the peasants.

“You come too!” the peasants shouted to Levin. “Never fear! You taste
our cake!”

Levin felt a strong inclination to drink a little vodka and to eat some
bread. He was exhausted, and felt it a great effort to drag his
staggering legs out of the mire, and for a minute he hesitated. But
Laska was setting. And immediately all his weariness vanished, and he
walked lightly through the swamp towards the dog. A snipe flew up at
his feet; he fired and killed it. Laska still pointed.—“Fetch it!”
Another bird flew up close to the dog. Levin fired. But it was an
unlucky day for him; he missed it, and when he went to look for the one
he had shot, he could not find that either. He wandered all about the
reeds, but Laska did not believe he had shot it, and when he sent her
to find it, she pretended to hunt for it, but did not really. And in
the absence of Vassenka, on whom Levin threw the blame of his failure,
things went no better. There were plenty of snipe still, but Levin made
one miss after another.

The slanting rays of the sun were still hot; his clothes, soaked
through with perspiration, stuck to his body; his left boot full of
water weighed heavily on his leg and squeaked at every step; the sweat
ran in drops down his powder-grimed face, his mouth was full of the
bitter taste, his nose of the smell of powder and stagnant water, his
ears were ringing with the incessant whir of the snipe; he could not
touch the stock of his gun, it was so hot; his heart beat with short,
rapid throbs; his hands shook with excitement, and his weary legs
stumbled and staggered over the hillocks and in the swamp, but still he
walked on and still he shot. At last, after a disgraceful miss, he
flung his gun and his hat on the ground.

“No, I must control myself,” he said to himself. Picking up his gun and
his hat, he called Laska, and went out of the swamp. When he got on to
dry ground he sat down, pulled off his boot and emptied it, then walked
to the marsh, drank some stagnant-tasting water, moistened his burning
hot gun, and washed his face and hands. Feeling refreshed, he went back
to the spot where a snipe had settled, firmly resolved to keep cool.

He tried to be calm, but it was the same again. His finger pressed the
cock before he had taken a good aim at the bird. It got worse and
worse.

He had only five birds in his game-bag when he walked out of the marsh
towards the alders where he was to rejoin Stepan Arkadyevitch.

Before he caught sight of Stepan Arkadyevitch he saw his dog. Krak
darted out from behind the twisted root of an alder, black all over
with the stinking mire of the marsh, and with the air of a conqueror
sniffed at Laska. Behind Krak there came into view in the shade of the
alder tree the shapely figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch. He came to meet
him, red and perspiring, with unbuttoned neckband, still limping in the
same way.

“Well? You have been popping away!” he said, smiling good-humoredly.

“How have you got on?” queried Levin. But there was no need to ask, for
he had already seen the full game bag.

“Oh, pretty fair.”

He had fourteen birds.

“A splendid marsh! I’ve no doubt Veslovsky got in your way. It’s
awkward too, shooting with one dog,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, to
soften his triumph.


Chapter 11

When Levin and Stepan Arkadyevitch reached the peasant’s hut where
Levin always used to stay, Veslovsky was already there. He was sitting
in the middle of the hut, clinging with both hands to the bench from
which he was being pulled by a soldier, the brother of the peasant’s
wife, who was helping him off with his miry boots. Veslovsky was
laughing his infectious, good-humored laugh.

“I’ve only just come. _Ils ont été charmants_. Just fancy, they gave me
drink, fed me! Such bread, it was exquisite! _Délicieux!_ And the
vodka, I never tasted any better. And they would not take a penny for
anything. And they kept saying: ‘Excuse our homely ways.’”

“What should they take anything for? They were entertaining you, to be
sure. Do you suppose they keep vodka for sale?” said the soldier,
succeeding at last in pulling the soaked boot off the blackened
stocking.

In spite of the dirtiness of the hut, which was all muddied by their
boots and the filthy dogs licking themselves clean, and the smell of
marsh mud and powder that filled the room, and the absence of knives
and forks, the party drank their tea and ate their supper with a relish
only known to sportsmen. Washed and clean, they went into a hay-barn
swept ready for them, where the coachman had been making up beds for
the gentlemen.

Though it was dusk, not one of them wanted to go to sleep.

After wavering among reminiscences and anecdotes of guns, of dogs, and
of former shooting parties, the conversation rested on a topic that
interested all of them. After Vassenka had several times over expressed
his appreciation of this delightful sleeping place among the fragrant
hay, this delightful broken cart (he supposed it to be broken because
the shafts had been taken out), of the good nature of the peasants that
had treated him to vodka, of the dogs who lay at the feet of their
respective masters, Oblonsky began telling them of a delightful
shooting party at Malthus’s, where he had stayed the previous summer.

Malthus was a well-known capitalist, who had made his money by
speculation in railway shares. Stepan Arkadyevitch described what
grouse moors this Malthus had bought in the Tver province, and how they
were preserved, and of the carriages and dogcarts in which the shooting
party had been driven, and the luncheon pavilion that had been rigged
up at the marsh.

“I don’t understand you,” said Levin, sitting up in the hay; “how is it
such people don’t disgust you? I can understand a lunch with Lafitte is
all very pleasant, but don’t you dislike just that very sumptuousness?
All these people, just like our spirit monopolists in old days, get
their money in a way that gains them the contempt of everyone. They
don’t care for their contempt, and then they use their dishonest gains
to buy off the contempt they have deserved.”

“Perfectly true!” chimed in Vassenka Veslovsky. “Perfectly! Oblonsky,
of course, goes out of _bonhomie_, but other people say: ‘Well,
Oblonsky stays with them.’...”

“Not a bit of it.” Levin could hear that Oblonsky was smiling as he
spoke. “I simply don’t consider him more dishonest than any other
wealthy merchant or nobleman. They’ve all made their money alike—by
their work and their intelligence.”

“Oh, by what work? Do you call it work to get hold of concessions and
speculate with them?”

“Of course it’s work. Work in this sense, that if it were not for him
and others like him, there would have been no railways.”

“But that’s not work, like the work of a peasant or a learned
profession.”

“Granted, but it’s work in the sense that his activity produces a
result—the railways. But of course you think the railways useless.”

“No, that’s another question; I am prepared to admit that they’re
useful. But all profit that is out of proportion to the labor expended
is dishonest.”

“But who is to define what is proportionate?”

“Making profit by dishonest means, by trickery,” said Levin, conscious
that he could not draw a distinct line between honesty and dishonesty.
“Such as banking, for instance,” he went on. “It’s an evil—the amassing
of huge fortunes without labor, just the same thing as with the spirit
monopolies, it’s only the form that’s changed. _Le roi est mort, vive
le roi_. No sooner were the spirit monopolies abolished than the
railways came up, and banking companies; that, too, is profit without
work.”

“Yes, that may all be very true and clever.... Lie down, Krak!” Stepan
Arkadyevitch called to his dog, who was scratching and turning over all
the hay. He was obviously convinced of the correctness of his position,
and so talked serenely and without haste. “But you have not drawn the
line between honest and dishonest work. That I receive a bigger salary
than my chief clerk, though he knows more about the work than I
do—that’s dishonest, I suppose?”

“I can’t say.”

“Well, but I can tell you: your receiving some five thousand, let’s
say, for your work on the land, while our host, the peasant here,
however hard he works, can never get more than fifty roubles, is just
as dishonest as my earning more than my chief clerk, and Malthus
getting more than a station-master. No, quite the contrary; I see that
society takes up a sort of antagonistic attitude to these people, which
is utterly baseless, and I fancy there’s envy at the bottom of it....”

“No, that’s unfair,” said Veslovsky; “how could envy come in? There is
something not nice about that sort of business.”

“You say,” Levin went on, “that it’s unjust for me to receive five
thousand, while the peasant has fifty; that’s true. It is unfair, and I
feel it, but....”

“It really is. Why is it we spend our time riding, drinking, shooting,
doing nothing, while they are forever at work?” said Vassenka
Veslovsky, obviously for the first time in his life reflecting on the
question, and consequently considering it with perfect sincerity.

“Yes, you feel it, but you don’t give him your property,” said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, intentionally, as it seemed, provoking Levin.

There had arisen of late something like a secret antagonism between the
two brothers-in-law; as though, since they had married sisters, a kind
of rivalry had sprung up between them as to which was ordering his life
best, and now this hostility showed itself in the conversation, as it
began to take a personal note.

“I don’t give it away, because no one demands that from me, and if I
wanted to, I could not give it away,” answered Levin, “and have no one
to give it to.”

“Give it to this peasant, he would not refuse it.”

“Yes, but how am I to give it up? Am I to go to him and make a deed of
conveyance?”

“I don’t know; but if you are convinced that you have no right....”

“I’m not at all convinced. On the contrary, I feel I have no right to
give it up, that I have duties both to the land and to my family.”

“No, excuse me, but if you consider this inequality is unjust, why is
it you don’t act accordingly?...”

“Well, I do act negatively on that idea, so far as not trying to
increase the difference of position existing between him and me.”

“No, excuse me, that’s a paradox.”

“Yes, there’s something of a sophistry about that,” Veslovsky agreed.
“Ah! our host; so you’re not asleep yet?” he said to the peasant who
came into the barn, opening the creaking door. “How is it you’re not
asleep?”

“No, how’s one to sleep! I thought our gentlemen would be asleep, but I
heard them chattering. I want to get a hook from here. She won’t bite?”
he added, stepping cautiously with his bare feet.

“And where are you going to sleep?”

“We are going out for the night with the beasts.”

“Ah, what a night!” said Veslovsky, looking out at the edge of the hut
and the unharnessed wagonette that could be seen in the faint light of
the evening glow in the great frame of the open doors. “But listen,
there are women’s voices singing, and, on my word, not badly too. Who’s
that singing, my friend?”

“That’s the maids from hard by here.”

“Let’s go, let’s have a walk! We shan’t go to sleep, you know.
Oblonsky, come along!”

“If one could only do both, lie here and go,” answered Oblonsky,
stretching. “It’s capital lying here.”

“Well, I shall go by myself,” said Veslovsky, getting up eagerly, and
putting on his shoes and stockings. “Good-bye, gentlemen. If it’s fun,
I’ll fetch you. You’ve treated me to some good sport, and I won’t
forget you.”

“He really is a capital fellow, isn’t he?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
when Veslovsky had gone out and the peasant had closed the door after
him.

“Yes, capital,” answered Levin, still thinking of the subject of their
conversation just before. It seemed to him that he had clearly
expressed his thoughts and feelings to the best of his capacity, and
yet both of them, straightforward men and not fools, had said with one
voice that he was comforting himself with sophistries. This
disconcerted him.

“It’s just this, my dear boy. One must do one of two things: either
admit that the existing order of society is just, and then stick up for
one’s rights in it; or acknowledge that you are enjoying unjust
privileges, as I do, and then enjoy them and be satisfied.”

“No, if it were unjust, you could not enjoy these advantages and be
satisfied—at least I could not. The great thing for me is to feel that
I’m not to blame.”

“What do you say, why not go after all?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
evidently weary of the strain of thought. “We shan’t go to sleep, you
know. Come, let’s go!”

Levin did not answer. What they had said in the conversation, that he
acted justly only in a negative sense, absorbed his thoughts. “Can it
be that it’s only possible to be just negatively?” he was asking
himself.

“How strong the smell of the fresh hay is, though,” said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, getting up. “There’s not a chance of sleeping. Vassenka
has been getting up some fun there. Do you hear the laughing and his
voice? Hadn’t we better go? Come along!”

“No, I’m not coming,” answered Levin.

“Surely that’s not a matter of principle too,” said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, smiling, as he felt about in the dark for his cap.

“It’s not a matter of principle, but why should I go?”

“But do you know you are preparing trouble for yourself,” said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, finding his cap and getting up.

“How so?”

“Do you suppose I don’t see the line you’ve taken up with your wife? I
heard how it’s a question of the greatest consequence, whether or not
you’re to be away for a couple of days’ shooting. That’s all very well
as an idyllic episode, but for your whole life that won’t answer. A man
must be independent; he has his masculine interests. A man has to be
manly,” said Oblonsky, opening the door.

“In what way? To go running after servant girls?” said Levin.

“Why not, if it amuses him? _Ça ne tire pas à conséquence_. It won’t do
my wife any harm, and it’ll amuse me. The great thing is to respect the
sanctity of the home. There should be nothing in the home. But don’t
tie your own hands.”

“Perhaps so,” said Levin dryly, and he turned on his side. “Tomorrow,
early, I want to go shooting, and I won’t wake anyone, and shall set
off at daybreak.”

“_Messieurs, venez vite!_” they heard the voice of Veslovsky coming
back. “_Charmante!_ I’ve made such a discovery. _Charmante!_ a perfect
Gretchen, and I’ve already made friends with her. Really, exceedingly
pretty,” he declared in a tone of approval, as though she had been made
pretty entirely on his account, and he was expressing his satisfaction
with the entertainment that had been provided for him.

Levin pretended to be asleep, while Oblonsky, putting on his slippers,
and lighting a cigar, walked out of the barn, and soon their voices
were lost.

For a long while Levin could not get to sleep. He heard the horses
munching hay, then he heard the peasant and his elder boy getting ready
for the night, and going off for the night watch with the beasts, then
he heard the soldier arranging his bed on the other side of the barn,
with his nephew, the younger son of their peasant host. He heard the
boy in his shrill little voice telling his uncle what he thought about
the dogs, who seemed to him huge and terrible creatures, and asking
what the dogs were going to hunt next day, and the soldier in a husky,
sleepy voice, telling him the sportsmen were going in the morning to
the marsh, and would shoot with their guns; and then, to check the
boy’s questions, he said, “Go to sleep, Vaska; go to sleep, or you’ll
catch it,” and soon after he began snoring himself, and everything was
still. He could only hear the snort of the horses, and the guttural cry
of a snipe.

“Is it really only negative?” he repeated to himself. “Well, what of
it? It’s not my fault.” And he began thinking about the next day.

“Tomorrow I’ll go out early, and I’ll make a point of keeping cool.
There are lots of snipe; and there are grouse too. When I come back
there’ll be the note from Kitty. Yes, Stiva may be right, I’m not manly
with her, I’m tied to her apron-strings.... Well, it can’t be helped!
Negative again....”

Half asleep, he heard the laughter and mirthful talk of Veslovsky and
Stepan Arkadyevitch. For an instant he opened his eyes: the moon was
up, and in the open doorway, brightly lighted up by the moonlight, they
were standing talking. Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying something of the
freshness of one girl, comparing her to a freshly peeled nut, and
Veslovsky with his infectious laugh was repeating some words, probably
said to him by a peasant: “Ah, you do your best to get round her!”
Levin, half asleep, said:

“Gentlemen, tomorrow before daylight!” and fell asleep.


Chapter 12

Waking up at earliest dawn, Levin tried to wake his companions.
Vassenka, lying on his stomach, with one leg in a stocking thrust out,
was sleeping so soundly that he could elicit no response. Oblonsky,
half asleep, declined to get up so early. Even Laska, who was asleep,
curled up in the hay, got up unwillingly, and lazily stretched out and
straightened her hind legs one after the other. Getting on his boots
and stockings, taking his gun, and carefully opening the creaking door
of the barn, Levin went out into the road. The coachmen were sleeping
in their carriages, the horses were dozing. Only one was lazily eating
oats, dipping its nose into the manger. It was still gray out-of-doors.

“Why are you up so early, my dear?” the old woman, their hostess, said,
coming out of the hut and addressing him affectionately as an old
friend.

“Going shooting, granny. Do I go this way to the marsh?”

“Straight out at the back; by our threshing floor, my dear, and hemp
patches; there’s a little footpath.” Stepping carefully with her
sunburnt, bare feet, the old woman conducted Levin, and moved back the
fence for him by the threshing floor.

“Straight on and you’ll come to the marsh. Our lads drove the cattle
there yesterday evening.”

Laska ran eagerly forward along the little path. Levin followed her
with a light, rapid step, continually looking at the sky. He hoped the
sun would not be up before he reached the marsh. But the sun did not
delay. The moon, which had been bright when he went out, by now shone
only like a crescent of quicksilver. The pink flush of dawn, which one
could not help seeing before, now had to be sought to be discerned at
all. What were before undefined, vague blurs in the distant countryside
could now be distinctly seen. They were sheaves of rye. The dew, not
visible till the sun was up, wetted Levin’s legs and his blouse above
his belt in the high growing, fragrant hemp patch, from which the
pollen had already fallen out. In the transparent stillness of morning
the smallest sounds were audible. A bee flew by Levin’s ear with the
whizzing sound of a bullet. He looked carefully, and saw a second and a
third. They were all flying from the beehives behind the hedge, and
they disappeared over the hemp patch in the direction of the marsh. The
path led straight to the marsh. The marsh could be recognized by the
mist which rose from it, thicker in one place and thinner in another,
so that the reeds and willow bushes swayed like islands in this mist.
At the edge of the marsh and the road, peasant boys and men, who had
been herding for the night, were lying, and in the dawn all were asleep
under their coats. Not far from them were three hobbled horses. One of
them clanked a chain. Laska walked beside her master, pressing a little
forward and looking round. Passing the sleeping peasants and reaching
the first reeds, Levin examined his pistols and let his dog off. One of
the horses, a sleek, dark-brown three-year-old, seeing the dog, started
away, switched its tail and snorted. The other horses too were
frightened, and splashing through the water with their hobbled legs,
and drawing their hoofs out of the thick mud with a squelching sound,
they bounded out of the marsh. Laska stopped, looking ironically at the
horses and inquiringly at Levin. Levin patted Laska, and whistled as a
sign that she might begin.

Laska ran joyfully and anxiously through the slush that swayed under
her.

Running into the marsh among the familiar scents of roots, marsh
plants, and slime, and the extraneous smell of horse dung, Laska
detected at once a smell that pervaded the whole marsh, the scent of
that strong-smelling bird that always excited her more than any other.
Here and there among the moss and marsh plants this scent was very
strong, but it was impossible to determine in which direction it grew
stronger or fainter. To find the direction, she had to go farther away
from the wind. Not feeling the motion of her legs, Laska bounded with a
stiff gallop, so that at each bound she could stop short, to the right,
away from the wind that blew from the east before sunrise, and turned
facing the wind. Sniffing in the air with dilated nostrils, she felt at
once that not their tracks only but they themselves were here before
her, and not one, but many. Laska slackened her speed. They were here,
but where precisely she could not yet determine. To find the very spot,
she began to make a circle, when suddenly her master’s voice drew her
off. “Laska! here?” he asked, pointing her to a different direction.
She stopped, asking him if she had better not go on doing as she had
begun. But he repeated his command in an angry voice, pointing to a
spot covered with water, where there could not be anything. She obeyed
him, pretending she was looking, so as to please him, went round it,
and went back to her former position, and was at once aware of the
scent again. Now when he was not hindering her, she knew what to do,
and without looking at what was under her feet, and to her vexation
stumbling over a high stump into the water, but righting herself with
her strong, supple legs, she began making the circle which was to make
all clear to her. The scent of them reached her, stronger and stronger,
and more and more defined, and all at once it became perfectly clear to
her that one of them was here, behind this tuft of reeds, five paces in
front of her; she stopped, and her whole body was still and rigid. On
her short legs she could see nothing in front of her, but by the scent
she knew it was sitting not more than five paces off. She stood still,
feeling more and more conscious of it, and enjoying it in anticipation.
Her tail was stretched straight and tense, and only wagging at the
extreme end. Her mouth was slightly open, her ears raised. One ear had
been turned wrong side out as she ran up, and she breathed heavily but
warily, and still more warily looked round, but more with her eyes than
her head, to her master. He was coming along with the face she knew so
well, though the eyes were always terrible to her. He stumbled over the
stump as he came, and moved, as she thought, extraordinarily slowly.
She thought he came slowly, but he was running.

Noticing Laska’s special attitude as she crouched on the ground, as it
were, scratching big prints with her hind paws, and with her mouth
slightly open, Levin knew she was pointing at grouse, and with an
inward prayer for luck, especially with the first bird, he ran up to
her. Coming quite close up to her, he could from his height look beyond
her, and he saw with his eyes what she was seeing with her nose. In a
space between two little thickets, at a couple of yards’ distance, he
could see a grouse. Turning its head, it was listening. Then lightly
preening and folding its wings, it disappeared round a corner with a
clumsy wag of its tail.

“Fetch it, fetch it!” shouted Levin, giving Laska a shove from behind.

“But I can’t go,” thought Laska. “Where am I to go? From here I feel
them, but if I move forward I shall know nothing of where they are or
who they are.” But then he shoved her with his knee, and in an excited
whisper said, “Fetch it, Laska.”

“Well, if that’s what he wishes, I’ll do it, but I can’t answer for
myself now,” she thought, and darted forward as fast as her legs would
carry her between the thick bushes. She scented nothing now; she could
only see and hear, without understanding anything.

Ten paces from her former place a grouse rose with a guttural cry and
the peculiar round sound of its wings. And immediately after the shot
it splashed heavily with its white breast on the wet mire. Another bird
did not linger, but rose behind Levin without the dog. When Levin
turned towards it, it was already some way off. But his shot caught it.
Flying twenty paces further, the second grouse rose upwards, and
whirling round like a ball, dropped heavily on a dry place.

“Come, this is going to be some good!” thought Levin, packing the warm
and fat grouse into his game bag. “Eh, Laska, will it be good?”

When Levin, after loading his gun, moved on, the sun had fully risen,
though unseen behind the storm-clouds. The moon had lost all of its
luster, and was like a white cloud in the sky. Not a single star could
be seen. The sedge, silvery with dew before, now shone like gold. The
stagnant pools were all like amber. The blue of the grass had changed
to yellow-green. The marsh birds twittered and swarmed about the brook
and upon the bushes that glittered with dew and cast long shadows. A
hawk woke up and settled on a haycock, turning its head from side to
side and looking discontentedly at the marsh. Crows were flying about
the field, and a bare-legged boy was driving the horses to an old man,
who had got up from under his long coat and was combing his hair. The
smoke from the gun was white as milk over the green of the grass.

One of the boys ran up to Levin.

“Uncle, there were ducks here yesterday!” he shouted to him, and he
walked a little way off behind him.

And Levin was doubly pleased, in sight of the boy, who expressed his
approval, at killing three snipe, one after another, straight off.


Chapter 13

The sportsman’s saying, that if the first beast or the first bird is
not missed, the day will be lucky, turned out correct.

At ten o’clock Levin, weary, hungry, and happy after a tramp of twenty
miles, returned to his night’s lodging with nineteen head of fine game
and one duck, which he tied to his belt, as it would not go into the
game bag. His companions had long been awake, and had had time to get
hungry and have breakfast.

“Wait a bit, wait a bit, I know there are nineteen,” said Levin,
counting a second time over the grouse and snipe, that looked so much
less important now, bent and dry and bloodstained, with heads crooked
aside, than they did when they were flying.

The number was verified, and Stepan Arkadyevitch’s envy pleased Levin.
He was pleased too on returning to find the man sent by Kitty with a
note was already there.

“I am perfectly well and happy. If you were uneasy about me, you can
feel easier than ever. I’ve a new bodyguard, Marya Vlasyevna,”—this was
the midwife, a new and important personage in Levin’s domestic life.
“She has come to have a look at me. She found me perfectly well, and we
have kept her till you are back. All are happy and well, and please,
don’t be in a hurry to come back, but, if the sport is good, stay
another day.”

These two pleasures, his lucky shooting and the letter from his wife,
were so great that two slightly disagreeable incidents passed lightly
over Levin. One was that the chestnut trace horse, who had been
unmistakably overworked on the previous day, was off his feed and out
of sorts. The coachman said he was “Overdriven yesterday, Konstantin
Dmitrievitch. Yes, indeed! driven ten miles with no sense!”

The other unpleasant incident, which for the first minute destroyed his
good humor, though later he laughed at it a great deal, was to find
that of all the provisions Kitty had provided in such abundance that
one would have thought there was enough for a week, nothing was left.
On his way back, tired and hungry from shooting, Levin had so distinct
a vision of meat-pies that as he approached the hut he seemed to smell
and taste them, as Laska had smelt the game, and he immediately told
Philip to give him some. It appeared that there were no pies left, nor
even any chicken.

“Well, this fellow’s appetite!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing and
pointing at Vassenka Veslovsky. “I never suffer from loss of appetite,
but he’s really marvelous!...”

“Well, it can’t be helped,” said Levin, looking gloomily at Veslovsky.
“Well, Philip, give me some beef, then.”

“The beef’s been eaten, and the bones given to the dogs,” answered
Philip.

Levin was so hurt that he said, in a tone of vexation, “You might have
left me something!” and he felt ready to cry.

“Then put away the game,” he said in a shaking voice to Philip, trying
not to look at Vassenka, “and cover them with some nettles. And you
might at least ask for some milk for me.”

But when he had drunk some milk, he felt ashamed immediately at having
shown his annoyance to a stranger, and he began to laugh at his hungry
mortification.

In the evening they went shooting again, and Veslovsky had several
successful shots, and in the night they drove home.

Their homeward journey was as lively as their drive out had been.
Veslovsky sang songs and related with enjoyment his adventures with the
peasants, who had regaled him with vodka, and said to him, “Excuse our
homely ways,” and his night’s adventures with kiss-in-the-ring and the
servant-girl and the peasant, who had asked him was he married, and on
learning that he was not, said to him, “Well, mind you don’t run after
other men’s wives—you’d better get one of your own.” These words had
particularly amused Veslovsky.

“Altogether, I’ve enjoyed our outing awfully. And you, Levin?”

“I have, very much,” Levin said quite sincerely. It was particularly
delightful to him to have got rid of the hostility he had been feeling
towards Vassenka Veslovsky at home, and to feel instead the most
friendly disposition to him.


Chapter 14

Next day at ten o’clock Levin, who had already gone his rounds, knocked
at the room where Vassenka had been put for the night.

“_Entrez!_” Veslovsky called to him. “Excuse me, I’ve only just
finished my ablutions,” he said, smiling, standing before him in his
underclothes only.

“Don’t mind me, please.” Levin sat down in the window. “Have you slept
well?”

“Like the dead. What sort of day is it for shooting?”

“What will you take, tea or coffee?”

“Neither. I’ll wait till lunch. I’m really ashamed. I suppose the
ladies are down? A walk now would be capital. You show me your horses.”

After walking about the garden, visiting the stable, and even doing
some gymnastic exercises together on the parallel bars, Levin returned
to the house with his guest, and went with him into the drawing-room.

“We had splendid shooting, and so many delightful experiences!” said
Veslovsky, going up to Kitty, who was sitting at the samovar. “What a
pity ladies are cut off from these delights!”

“Well, I suppose he must say something to the lady of the house,” Levin
said to himself. Again he fancied something in the smile, in the
all-conquering air with which their guest addressed Kitty....

The princess, sitting on the other side of the table with Marya
Vlasyevna and Stepan Arkadyevitch, called Levin to her side, and began
to talk to him about moving to Moscow for Kitty’s confinement, and
getting ready rooms for them. Just as Levin had disliked all the
trivial preparations for his wedding, as derogatory to the grandeur of
the event, now he felt still more offensive the preparations for the
approaching birth, the date of which they reckoned, it seemed, on their
fingers. He tried to turn a deaf ear to these discussions of the best
patterns of long clothes for the coming baby; tried to turn away and
avoid seeing the mysterious, endless strips of knitting, the triangles
of linen, and so on, to which Dolly attached special importance. The
birth of a son (he was certain it would be a son) which was promised
him, but which he still could not believe in—so marvelous it
seemed—presented itself to his mind, on one hand, as a happiness so
immense, and therefore so incredible; on the other, as an event so
mysterious, that this assumption of a definite knowledge of what would
be, and consequent preparation for it, as for something ordinary that
did happen to people, jarred on him as confusing and humiliating.

But the princess did not understand his feelings, and put down his
reluctance to think and talk about it to carelessness and indifference,
and so she gave him no peace. She had commissioned Stepan Arkadyevitch
to look at a flat, and now she called Levin up.

“I know nothing about it, princess. Do as you think fit,” he said.

“You must decide when you will move.”

“I really don’t know. I know millions of children are born away from
Moscow, and doctors ... why....”

“But if so....”

“Oh, no, as Kitty wishes.”

“We can’t talk to Kitty about it! Do you want me to frighten her? Why,
this spring Natalia Golitzina died from having an ignorant doctor.”

“I will do just what you say,” he said gloomily.

The princess began talking to him, but he did not hear her. Though the
conversation with the princess had indeed jarred upon him, he was
gloomy, not on account of that conversation, but from what he saw at
the samovar.

“No, it’s impossible,” he thought, glancing now and then at Vassenka
bending over Kitty, telling her something with his charming smile, and
at her, flushed and disturbed.

There was something not nice in Vassenka’s attitude, in his eyes, in
his smile. Levin even saw something not nice in Kitty’s attitude and
look. And again the light died away in his eyes. Again, as before, all
of a sudden, without the slightest transition, he felt cast down from a
pinnacle of happiness, peace, and dignity, into an abyss of despair,
rage, and humiliation. Again everything and everyone had become hateful
to him.

“You do just as you think best, princess,” he said again, looking
round.

“Heavy is the cap of Monomach,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said playfully,
hinting, evidently, not simply at the princess’s conversation, but at
the cause of Levin’s agitation, which he had noticed.

“How late you are today, Dolly!”

Everyone got up to greet Darya Alexandrovna. Vassenka only rose for an
instant, and with the lack of courtesy to ladies characteristic of the
modern young man, he scarcely bowed, and resumed his conversation
again, laughing at something.

“I’ve been worried about Masha. She did not sleep well, and is
dreadfully tiresome today,” said Dolly.

The conversation Vassenka had started with Kitty was running on the
same lines as on the previous evening, discussing Anna, and whether
love is to be put higher than worldly considerations. Kitty disliked
the conversation, and she was disturbed both by the subject and the
tone in which it was conducted, and also by the knowledge of the effect
it would have on her husband. But she was too simple and innocent to
know how to cut short this conversation, or even to conceal the
superficial pleasure afforded her by the young man’s very obvious
admiration. She wanted to stop it, but she did not know what to do.
Whatever she did she knew would be observed by her husband, and the
worst interpretation put on it. And, in fact, when she asked Dolly what
was wrong with Masha, and Vassenka, waiting till this uninteresting
conversation was over, began to gaze indifferently at Dolly, the
question struck Levin as an unnatural and disgusting piece of
hypocrisy.

“What do you say, shall we go and look for mushrooms today?” said
Dolly.

“By all means, please, and I shall come too,” said Kitty, and she
blushed. She wanted from politeness to ask Vassenka whether he would
come, and she did not ask him. “Where are you going, Kostya?” she asked
her husband with a guilty face, as he passed by her with a resolute
step. This guilty air confirmed all his suspicions.

“The mechanician came when I was away; I haven’t seen him yet,” he
said, not looking at her.

He went downstairs, but before he had time to leave his study he heard
his wife’s familiar footsteps running with reckless speed to him.

“What do you want?” he said to her shortly. “We are busy.”

“I beg your pardon,” she said to the German mechanician; “I want a few
words with my husband.”

The German would have left the room, but Levin said to him:

“Don’t disturb yourself.”

“The train is at three?” queried the German. “I mustn’t be late.”

Levin did not answer him, but walked out himself with his wife.

“Well, what have you to say to me?” he said to her in French.

He did not look her in the face, and did not care to see that she in
her condition was trembling all over, and had a piteous, crushed look.

“I ... I want to say that we can’t go on like this; that this is
misery....” she said.

“The servants are here at the sideboard,” he said angrily; “don’t make
a scene.”

“Well, let’s go in here!”

They were standing in the passage. Kitty would have gone into the next
room, but there the English governess was giving Tanya a lesson.

“Well, come into the garden.”

In the garden they came upon a peasant weeding the path. And no longer
considering that the peasant could see her tear-stained and his
agitated face, that they looked like people fleeing from some disaster,
they went on with rapid steps, feeling that they must speak out and
clear up misunderstandings, must be alone together, and so get rid of
the misery they were both feeling.

“We can’t go on like this! It’s misery! I am wretched; you are
wretched. What for?” she said, when they had at last reached a solitary
garden seat at a turn in the lime tree avenue.

“But tell me one thing: was there in his tone anything unseemly, not
nice, humiliatingly horrible?” he said, standing before her again in
the same position with his clenched fists on his chest, as he had stood
before her that night.

“Yes,” she said in a shaking voice; “but, Kostya, surely you see I’m
not to blame? All the morning I’ve been trying to take a tone ... but
such people.... Why did he come? How happy we were!” she said,
breathless with the sobs that shook her.

Although nothing had been pursuing them, and there was nothing to run
away from, and they could not possibly have found anything very
delightful on that garden seat, the gardener saw with astonishment that
they passed him on their way home with comforted and radiant faces.


Chapter 15

After escorting his wife upstairs, Levin went to Dolly’s part of the
house. Darya Alexandrovna, for her part, was in great distress too that
day. She was walking about the room, talking angrily to a little girl,
who stood in the corner roaring.

“And you shall stand all day in the corner, and have your dinner all
alone, and not see one of your dolls, and I won’t make you a new
frock,” she said, not knowing how to punish her.

“Oh, she is a disgusting child!” she turned to Levin. “Where does she
get such wicked propensities?”

“Why, what has she done?” Levin said without much interest, for he had
wanted to ask her advice, and so was annoyed that he had come at an
unlucky moment.

“Grisha and she went into the raspberries, and there ... I can’t tell
you really what she did. It’s a thousand pities Miss Elliot’s not with
us. This one sees to nothing—she’s a machine.... _Figurez-vous que la
petite_?...”

And Darya Alexandrovna described Masha’s crime.

“That proves nothing; it’s not a question of evil propensities at all,
it’s simply mischief,” Levin assured her.

“But you are upset about something? What have you come for?” asked
Dolly. “What’s going on there?”

And in the tone of her question Levin heard that it would be easy for
him to say what he had meant to say.

“I’ve not been in there, I’ve been alone in the garden with Kitty.
We’ve had a quarrel for the second time since ... Stiva came.”

Dolly looked at him with her shrewd, comprehending eyes.

“Come, tell me, honor bright, has there been ... not in Kitty, but in
that gentleman’s behavior, a tone which might be unpleasant—not
unpleasant, but horrible, offensive to a husband?”

“You mean, how shall I say.... Stay, stay in the corner!” she said to
Masha, who, detecting a faint smile in her mother’s face, had been
turning round. “The opinion of the world would be that he is behaving
as young men do behave. _Il fait la cour à une jeune et jolie femme_,
and a husband who’s a man of the world should only be flattered by it.”

“Yes, yes,” said Levin gloomily; “but you noticed it?”

“Not only I, but Stiva noticed it. Just after breakfast he said to me
in so many words, _Je crois que Veslovsky fait un petit brin de cour à
Kitty_.”

“Well, that’s all right then; now I’m satisfied. I’ll send him away,”
said Levin.

“What do you mean! Are you crazy?” Dolly cried in horror; “nonsense,
Kostya, only think!” she said, laughing. “You can go now to Fanny,” she
said to Masha. “No, if you wish it, I’ll speak to Stiva. He’ll take him
away. He can say you’re expecting visitors. Altogether he doesn’t fit
into the house.”

“No, no, I’ll do it myself.”

“But you’ll quarrel with him?”

“Not a bit. I shall so enjoy it,” Levin said, his eyes flashing with
real enjoyment. “Come, forgive her, Dolly, she won’t do it again,” he
said of the little sinner, who had not gone to Fanny, but was standing
irresolutely before her mother, waiting and looking up from under her
brows to catch her mother’s eye.

The mother glanced at her. The child broke into sobs, hid her face on
her mother’s lap, and Dolly laid her thin, tender hand on her head.

“And what is there in common between us and him?” thought Levin, and he
went off to look for Veslovsky.

As he passed through the passage he gave orders for the carriage to be
got ready to drive to the station.

“The spring was broken yesterday,” said the footman.

“Well, the covered trap, then, and make haste. Where’s the visitor?”

“The gentleman’s gone to his room.”

Levin came upon Veslovsky at the moment when the latter, having
unpacked his things from his trunk, and laid out some new songs, was
putting on his gaiters to go out riding.

Whether there was something exceptional in Levin’s face, or that
Vassenka was himself conscious that _ce petit brin de cour_ he was
making was out of place in this family, but he was somewhat (as much as
a young man in society can be) disconcerted at Levin’s entrance.

“You ride in gaiters?”

“Yes, it’s much cleaner,” said Vassenka, putting his fat leg on a
chair, fastening the bottom hook, and smiling with simple-hearted good
humor.

He was undoubtedly a good-natured fellow, and Levin felt sorry for him
and ashamed of himself, as his host, when he saw the shy look on
Vassenka’s face.

On the table lay a piece of stick which they had broken together that
morning, trying their strength. Levin took the fragment in his hands
and began smashing it up, breaking bits off the stick, not knowing how
to begin.

“I wanted....” He paused, but suddenly, remembering Kitty and
everything that had happened, he said, looking him resolutely in the
face: “I have ordered the horses to be put-to for you.”

“How so?” Vassenka began in surprise. “To drive where?”

“For you to drive to the station,” Levin said gloomily.

“Are you going away, or has something happened?”

“It happens that I expect visitors,” said Levin, his strong fingers
more and more rapidly breaking off the ends of the split stick. “And
I’m not expecting visitors, and nothing has happened, but I beg you to
go away. You can explain my rudeness as you like.”

Vassenka drew himself up.

“I beg you to explain....” he said with dignity, understanding at last.

“I can’t explain,” Levin said softly and deliberately, trying to
control the trembling of his jaw; “and you’d better not ask.”

And as the split ends were all broken off, Levin clutched the thick
ends in his finger, broke the stick in two, and carefully caught the
end as it fell.

Probably the sight of those nervous fingers, of the muscles he had
proved that morning at gymnastics, of the glittering eyes, the soft
voice, and quivering jaws, convinced Vassenka better than any words. He
bowed, shrugging his shoulders, and smiling contemptuously.

“Can I not see Oblonsky?”

The shrug and the smile did not irritate Levin.

“What else was there for him to do?” he thought.

“I’ll send him to you at once.”

“What madness is this?” Stepan Arkadyevitch said when, after hearing
from his friend that he was being turned out of the house, he found
Levin in the garden, where he was walking about waiting for his guest’s
departure. “_Mais c’est ridicule!_ What fly has stung you? _Mais c’est
du dernier ridicule!_ What did you think, if a young man....”

But the place where Levin had been stung was evidently still sore, for
he turned pale again, when Stepan Arkadyevitch would have enlarged on
the reason, and he himself cut him short.

“Please don’t go into it! I can’t help it. I feel ashamed of how I’m
treating you and him. But it won’t be, I imagine, a great grief to him
to go, and his presence was distasteful to me and to my wife.”

“But it’s insulting to him! _Et puis c’est ridicule_.”

“And to me it’s both insulting and distressing! And I’m not at fault in
any way, and there’s no need for me to suffer.”

“Well, this I didn’t expect of you! _On peut être jaloux, mais à ce
point, c’est du dernier ridicule!_”

Levin turned quickly, and walked away from him into the depths of the
avenue, and he went on walking up and down alone. Soon he heard the
rumble of the trap, and saw from behind the trees how Vassenka, sitting
in the hay (unluckily there was no seat in the trap) in his Scotch cap,
was driven along the avenue, jolting up and down over the ruts.

“What’s this?” Levin thought, when a footman ran out of the house and
stopped the trap. It was the mechanician, whom Levin had totally
forgotten. The mechanician, bowing low, said something to Veslovsky,
then clambered into the trap, and they drove off together.

Stepan Arkadyevitch and the princess were much upset by Levin’s action.
And he himself felt not only in the highest degree _ridicule_, but also
utterly guilty and disgraced. But remembering what sufferings he and
his wife had been through, when he asked himself how he should act
another time, he answered that he should do just the same again.

In spite of all this, towards the end of that day, everyone except the
princess, who could not pardon Levin’s action, became extraordinarily
lively and good-humored, like children after a punishment or grown-up
people after a dreary, ceremonious reception, so that by the evening
Vassenka’s dismissal was spoken of, in the absence of the princess, as
though it were some remote event. And Dolly, who had inherited her
father’s gift of humorous storytelling, made Varenka helpless with
laughter as she related for the third and fourth time, always with
fresh humorous additions, how she had only just put on her new shoes
for the benefit of the visitor, and on going into the drawing-room,
heard suddenly the rumble of the trap. And who should be in the trap
but Vassenka himself, with his Scotch cap, and his songs and his
gaiters, and all, sitting in the hay.

“If only you’d ordered out the carriage! But no! and then I hear:
‘Stop!’ Oh, I thought they’ve relented. I look out, and behold a fat
German being sat down by him and driving away.... And my new shoes all
for nothing!...”


Chapter 16

Darya Alexandrovna carried out her intention and went to see Anna. She
was sorry to annoy her sister and to do anything Levin disliked. She
quite understood how right the Levins were in not wishing to have
anything to do with Vronsky. But she felt she must go and see Anna, and
show her that her feelings could not be changed, in spite of the change
in her position. That she might be independent of the Levins in this
expedition, Darya Alexandrovna sent to the village to hire horses for
the drive; but Levin learning of it went to her to protest.

“What makes you suppose that I dislike your going? But, even if I did
dislike it, I should still more dislike your not taking my horses,” he
said. “You never told me that you were going for certain. Hiring horses
in the village is disagreeable to me, and, what’s of more importance,
they’ll undertake the job and never get you there. I have horses. And
if you don’t want to wound me, you’ll take mine.”

Darya Alexandrovna had to consent, and on the day fixed Levin had ready
for his sister-in-law a set of four horses and relays, getting them
together from the farm and saddle-horses—not at all a smart-looking
set, but capable of taking Darya Alexandrovna the whole distance in a
single day. At that moment, when horses were wanted for the princess,
who was going, and for the midwife, it was a difficult matter for Levin
to make up the number, but the duties of hospitality would not let him
allow Darya Alexandrovna to hire horses when staying in his house.
Moreover, he was well aware that the twenty roubles that would be asked
for the journey were a serious matter for her; Darya Alexandrovna’s
pecuniary affairs, which were in a very unsatisfactory state, were
taken to heart by the Levins as if they were their own.

Darya Alexandrovna, by Levin’s advice, started before daybreak. The
road was good, the carriage comfortable, the horses trotted along
merrily, and on the box, besides the coachman, sat the counting-house
clerk, whom Levin was sending instead of a groom for greater security.
Darya Alexandrovna dozed and waked up only on reaching the inn where
the horses were to be changed.

After drinking tea at the same well-to-do peasant’s with whom Levin had
stayed on the way to Sviazhsky’s, and chatting with the women about
their children, and with the old man about Count Vronsky, whom the
latter praised very highly, Darya Alexandrovna, at ten o’clock, went on
again. At home, looking after her children, she had no time to think.
So now, after this journey of four hours, all the thoughts she had
suppressed before rushed swarming into her brain, and she thought over
all her life as she never had before, and from the most different
points of view. Her thoughts seemed strange even to herself. At first
she thought about the children, about whom she was uneasy, although the
princess and Kitty (she reckoned more upon her) had promised to look
after them. “If only Masha does not begin her naughty tricks, if Grisha
isn’t kicked by a horse, and Lily’s stomach isn’t upset again!” she
thought. But these questions of the present were succeeded by questions
of the immediate future. She began thinking how she had to get a new
flat in Moscow for the coming winter, to renew the drawing-room
furniture, and to make her elder girl a cloak. Then questions of the
more remote future occurred to her: how she was to place her children
in the world. “The girls are all right,” she thought; “but the boys?”

“It’s very well that I’m teaching Grisha, but of course that’s only
because I am free myself now, I’m not with child. Stiva, of course,
there’s no counting on. And with the help of good-natured friends I can
bring them up; but if there’s another baby coming?...” And the thought
struck her how untruly it was said that the curse laid on woman was
that in sorrow she should bring forth children.

“The birth itself, that’s nothing; but the months of carrying the
child—that’s what’s so intolerable,” she thought, picturing to herself
her last pregnancy, and the death of the last baby. And she recalled
the conversation she had just had with the young woman at the inn. On
being asked whether she had any children, the handsome young woman had
answered cheerfully:

“I had a girl baby, but God set me free; I buried her last Lent.”

“Well, did you grieve very much for her?” asked Darya Alexandrovna.

“Why grieve? The old man has grandchildren enough as it is. It was only
a trouble. No working, nor nothing. Only a tie.”

This answer had struck Darya Alexandrovna as revolting in spite of the
good-natured and pleasing face of the young woman; but now she could
not help recalling these words. In those cynical words there was indeed
a grain of truth.

“Yes, altogether,” thought Darya Alexandrovna, looking back over her
whole existence during those fifteen years of her married life,
“pregnancy, sickness, mental incapacity, indifference to everything,
and most of all—hideousness. Kitty, young and pretty as she is, even
Kitty has lost her looks; and I when I’m with child become hideous, I
know it. The birth, the agony, the hideous agonies, that last moment
... then the nursing, the sleepless nights, the fearful pains....”

Darya Alexandrovna shuddered at the mere recollection of the pain from
sore breasts which she had suffered with almost every child. “Then the
children’s illnesses, that everlasting apprehension; then bringing them
up; evil propensities” (she thought of little Masha’s crime among the
raspberries), “education, Latin—it’s all so incomprehensible and
difficult. And on the top of it all, the death of these children.” And
there rose again before her imagination the cruel memory, that always
tore her mother’s heart, of the death of her last little baby, who had
died of croup; his funeral, the callous indifference of all at the
little pink coffin, and her own torn heart, and her lonely anguish at
the sight of the pale little brow with its projecting temples, and the
open, wondering little mouth seen in the coffin at the moment when it
was being covered with the little pink lid with a cross braided on it.

“And all this, what’s it for? What is to come of it all? That I’m
wasting my life, never having a moment’s peace, either with child, or
nursing a child, forever irritable, peevish, wretched myself and
worrying others, repulsive to my husband, while the children are
growing up unhappy, badly educated, and penniless. Even now, if it
weren’t for spending the summer at the Levins’, I don’t know how we
should be managing to live. Of course Kostya and Kitty have so much
tact that we don’t feel it; but it can’t go on. They’ll have children,
they won’t be able to keep us; it’s a drag on them as it is. How is
papa, who has hardly anything left for himself, to help us? So that I
can’t even bring the children up by myself, and may find it hard with
the help of other people, at the cost of humiliation. Why, even if we
suppose the greatest good luck, that the children don’t die, and I
bring them up somehow. At the very best they’ll simply be decent
people. That’s all I can hope for. And to gain simply that—what
agonies, what toil!... One’s whole life ruined!” Again she recalled
what the young peasant woman had said, and again she was revolted at
the thought; but she could not help admitting that there was a grain of
brutal truth in the words.

“Is it far now, Mihail?” Darya Alexandrovna asked the counting-house
clerk, to turn her mind from thoughts that were frightening her.

“From this village, they say, it’s five miles.” The carriage drove
along the village street and onto a bridge. On the bridge was a crowd
of peasant women with coils of ties for the sheaves on their shoulders,
gaily and noisily chattering. They stood still on the bridge, staring
inquisitively at the carriage. All the faces turned to Darya
Alexandrovna looked to her healthy and happy, making her envious of
their enjoyment of life. “They’re all living, they’re all enjoying
life,” Darya Alexandrovna still mused when she had passed the peasant
women and was driving uphill again at a trot, seated comfortably on the
soft springs of the old carriage, “while I, let out, as it were from
prison, from the world of worries that fret me to death, am only
looking about me now for an instant. They all live; those peasant women
and my sister Natalia and Varenka and Anna, whom I am going to see—all,
but not I.

“And they attack Anna. What for? am I any better? I have, anyway, a
husband I love—not as I should like to love him, still I do love him,
while Anna never loved hers. How is she to blame? She wants to live.
God has put that in our hearts. Very likely I should have done the
same. Even to this day I don’t feel sure I did right in listening to
her at that terrible time when she came to me in Moscow. I ought then
to have cast off my husband and have begun my life fresh. I might have
loved and have been loved in reality. And is it any better as it is? I
don’t respect him. He’s necessary to me,” she thought about her
husband, “and I put up with him. Is that any better? At that time I
could still have been admired, I had beauty left me still,” Darya
Alexandrovna pursued her thoughts, and she would have liked to look at
herself in the looking-glass. She had a traveling looking-glass in her
handbag, and she wanted to take it out; but looking at the backs of the
coachman and the swaying counting-house clerk, she felt that she would
be ashamed if either of them were to look round, and she did not take
out the glass.

But without looking in the glass, she thought that even now it was not
too late; and she thought of Sergey Ivanovitch, who was always
particularly attentive to her, of Stiva’s good-hearted friend,
Turovtsin, who had helped her nurse her children through the
scarlatina, and was in love with her. And there was someone else, a
quite young man, who—her husband had told her it as a joke—thought her
more beautiful than either of her sisters. And the most passionate and
impossible romances rose before Darya Alexandrovna’s imagination. “Anna
did quite right, and certainly I shall never reproach her for it. She
is happy, she makes another person happy, and she’s not broken down as
I am, but most likely just as she always was, bright, clever, open to
every impression,” thought Darya Alexandrovna,—and a sly smile curved
her lips, for, as she pondered on Anna’s love affair, Darya
Alexandrovna constructed on parallel lines an almost identical love
affair for herself, with an imaginary composite figure, the ideal man
who was in love with her. She, like Anna, confessed the whole affair to
her husband. And the amazement and perplexity of Stepan Arkadyevitch at
this avowal made her smile.

In such daydreams she reached the turning of the highroad that led to
Vozdvizhenskoe.


Chapter 17

The coachman pulled up his four horses and looked round to the right,
to a field of rye, where some peasants were sitting on a cart. The
counting-house clerk was just going to jump down, but on second
thoughts he shouted peremptorily to the peasants instead, and beckoned
to them to come up. The wind, that seemed to blow as they drove,
dropped when the carriage stood still; gadflies settled on the steaming
horses that angrily shook them off. The metallic clank of a whetstone
against a scythe, that came to them from the cart, ceased. One of the
peasants got up and came towards the carriage.

“Well, you are slow!” the counting-house clerk shouted angrily to the
peasant who was stepping slowly with his bare feet over the ruts of the
rough dry road. “Come along, do!”

A curly-headed old man with a bit of bast tied round his hair, and his
bent back dark with perspiration, came towards the carriage, quickening
his steps, and took hold of the mud-guard with his sunburnt hand.

“Vozdvizhenskoe, the manor house? the count’s?” he repeated; “go on to
the end of this track. Then turn to the left. Straight along the avenue
and you’ll come right upon it. But whom do you want? The count
himself?”

“Well, are they at home, my good man?” Darya Alexandrovna said vaguely,
not knowing how to ask about Anna, even of this peasant.

“At home for sure,” said the peasant, shifting from one bare foot to
the other, and leaving a distinct print of five toes and a heel in the
dust. “Sure to be at home,” he repeated, evidently eager to talk. “Only
yesterday visitors arrived. There’s a sight of visitors come. What do
you want?” He turned round and called to a lad, who was shouting
something to him from the cart. “Oh! They all rode by here not long
since, to look at a reaping machine. They’ll be home by now. And who
will you be belonging to?...”

“We’ve come a long way,” said the coachman, climbing onto the box. “So
it’s not far?”

“I tell you, it’s just here. As soon as you get out....” he said,
keeping hold all the while of the carriage.

A healthy-looking, broad-shouldered young fellow came up too.

“What, is it laborers they want for the harvest?” he asked.

“I don’t know, my boy.”

“So you keep to the left, and you’ll come right on it,” said the
peasant, unmistakably loth to let the travelers go, and eager to
converse.

The coachman started the horses, but they were only just turning off
when the peasant shouted: “Stop! Hi, friend! Stop!” called the two
voices. The coachman stopped.

“They’re coming! They’re yonder!” shouted the peasant. “See what a
turn-out!” he said, pointing to four persons on horseback, and two in a
_char-à-banc_, coming along the road.

They were Vronsky with a jockey, Veslovsky and Anna on horseback, and
Princess Varvara and Sviazhsky in the _char-à-banc_. They had gone out
to look at the working of a new reaping machine.

When the carriage stopped, the party on horseback were coming at a
walking pace. Anna was in front beside Veslovsky. Anna, quietly walking
her horse, a sturdy English cob with cropped mane and short tail, her
beautiful head with her black hair straying loose under her high hat,
her full shoulders, her slender waist in her black riding habit, and
all the ease and grace of her deportment, impressed Dolly.

For the first minute it seemed to her unsuitable for Anna to be on
horseback. The conception of riding on horseback for a lady was, in
Darya Alexandrovna’s mind, associated with ideas of youthful flirtation
and frivolity, which, in her opinion, was unbecoming in Anna’s
position. But when she had scrutinized her, seeing her closer, she was
at once reconciled to her riding. In spite of her elegance, everything
was so simple, quiet, and dignified in the attitude, the dress and the
movements of Anna, that nothing could have been more natural.

Beside Anna, on a hot-looking gray cavalry horse, was Vassenka
Veslovsky in his Scotch cap with floating ribbons, his stout legs
stretched out in front, obviously pleased with his own appearance.
Darya Alexandrovna could not suppress a good-humored smile as she
recognized him. Behind rode Vronsky on a dark bay mare, obviously
heated from galloping. He was holding her in, pulling at the reins.

After him rode a little man in the dress of a jockey. Sviazhsky and
Princess Varvara in a new _char-à-banc_ with a big, raven-black
trotting horse, overtook the party on horseback.

Anna’s face suddenly beamed with a joyful smile at the instant when, in
the little figure huddled in a corner of the old carriage, she
recognized Dolly. She uttered a cry, started in the saddle, and set her
horse into a gallop. On reaching the carriage she jumped off without
assistance, and holding up her riding habit, she ran up to greet Dolly.

“I thought it was you and dared not think it. How delightful! You can’t
fancy how glad I am!” she said, at one moment pressing her face against
Dolly and kissing her, and at the next holding her off and examining
her with a smile.

“Here’s a delightful surprise, Alexey!” she said, looking round at
Vronsky, who had dismounted, and was walking towards them.

Vronsky, taking off his tall gray hat, went up to Dolly.

“You wouldn’t believe how glad we are to see you,” he said, giving
peculiar significance to the words, and showing his strong white teeth
in a smile.

Vassenka Veslovsky, without getting off his horse, took off his cap and
greeted the visitor by gleefully waving the ribbons over his head.

“That’s Princess Varvara,” Anna said in reply to a glance of inquiry
from Dolly as the _char-à-banc_ drove up.

“Ah!” said Darya Alexandrovna, and unconsciously her face betrayed her
dissatisfaction.

Princess Varvara was her husband’s aunt, and she had long known her,
and did not respect her. She knew that Princess Varvara had passed her
whole life toadying on her rich relations, but that she should now be
sponging on Vronsky, a man who was nothing to her, mortified Dolly on
account of her kinship with her husband. Anna noticed Dolly’s
expression, and was disconcerted by it. She blushed, dropped her riding
habit, and stumbled over it.

Darya Alexandrovna went up to the _char-à-banc_ and coldly greeted
Princess Varvara. Sviazhsky too she knew. He inquired how his queer
friend with the young wife was, and running his eyes over the
ill-matched horses and the carriage with its patched mud-guards,
proposed to the ladies that they should get into the _char-à-banc_.

“And I’ll get into this vehicle,” he said. “The horse is quiet, and the
princess drives capitally.”

“No, stay as you were,” said Anna, coming up, “and we’ll go in the
carriage,” and taking Dolly’s arm, she drew her away.

Darya Alexandrovna’s eyes were fairly dazzled by the elegant carriage
of a pattern she had never seen before, the splendid horses, and the
elegant and gorgeous people surrounding her. But what struck her most
of all was the change that had taken place in Anna, whom she knew so
well and loved. Any other woman, a less close observer, not knowing
Anna before, or not having thought as Darya Alexandrovna had been
thinking on the road, would not have noticed anything special in Anna.
But now Dolly was struck by that temporary beauty, which is only found
in women during the moments of love, and which she saw now in Anna’s
face. Everything in her face, the clearly marked dimples in her cheeks
and chin, the line of her lips, the smile which, as it were, fluttered
about her face, the brilliance of her eyes, the grace and rapidity of
her movements, the fulness of the notes of her voice, even the manner
in which, with a sort of angry friendliness, she answered Veslovsky
when he asked permission to get on her cob, so as to teach it to gallop
with the right leg foremost—it was all peculiarly fascinating, and it
seemed as if she were herself aware of it, and rejoicing in it.

When both the women were seated in the carriage, a sudden embarrassment
came over both of them. Anna was disconcerted by the intent look of
inquiry Dolly fixed upon her. Dolly was embarrassed because after
Sviazhsky’s phrase about “this vehicle,” she could not help feeling
ashamed of the dirty old carriage in which Anna was sitting with her.
The coachman Philip and the counting-house clerk were experiencing the
same sensation. The counting-house clerk, to conceal his confusion,
busied himself settling the ladies, but Philip the coachman became
sullen, and was bracing himself not to be overawed in future by this
external superiority. He smiled ironically, looking at the raven horse,
and was already deciding in his own mind that this smart trotter in the
_char-à-banc_ was only good for _promenage_, and wouldn’t do thirty
miles straight off in the heat.

The peasants had all got up from the cart and were inquisitively and
mirthfully staring at the meeting of the friends, making their comments
on it.

“They’re pleased, too; haven’t seen each other for a long while,” said
the curly-headed old man with the bast round his hair.

“I say, Uncle Gerasim, if we could take that raven horse now, to cart
the corn, that ’ud be quick work!”

“Look-ee! Is that a woman in breeches?” said one of them, pointing to
Vassenka Veslovsky sitting in a side saddle.

“Nay, a man! See how smartly he’s going it!”

“Eh, lads! seems we’re not going to sleep, then?”

“What chance of sleep today!” said the old man, with a sidelong look at
the sun. “Midday’s past, look-ee! Get your hooks, and come along!”


Chapter 18

Anna looked at Dolly’s thin, care-worn face, with its wrinkles filled
with dust from the road, and she was on the point of saying what she
was thinking, that is, that Dolly had got thinner. But, conscious that
she herself had grown handsomer, and that Dolly’s eyes were telling her
so, she sighed and began to speak about herself.

“You are looking at me,” she said, “and wondering how I can be happy in
my position? Well! it’s shameful to confess, but I ... I’m inexcusably
happy. Something magical has happened to me, like a dream, when you’re
frightened, panic-stricken, and all of a sudden you wake up and all the
horrors are no more. I have waked up. I have lived through the misery,
the dread, and now for a long while past, especially since we’ve been
here, I’ve been so happy!...” she said, with a timid smile of inquiry
looking at Dolly.

“How glad I am!” said Dolly smiling, involuntarily speaking more coldly
than she wanted to. “I’m very glad for you. Why haven’t you written to
me?”

“Why?... Because I hadn’t the courage.... You forget my position....”

“To me? Hadn’t the courage? If you knew how I ... I look at....”

Darya Alexandrovna wanted to express her thoughts of the morning, but
for some reason it seemed to her now out of place to do so.

“But of that we’ll talk later. What’s this, what are all these
buildings?” she asked, wanting to change the conversation and pointing
to the red and green roofs that came into view behind the green hedges
of acacia and lilac. “Quite a little town.”

But Anna did not answer.

“No, no! How do you look at my position, what do you think of it?” she
asked.

“I consider....” Darya Alexandrovna was beginning, but at that instant
Vassenka Veslovsky, having brought the cob to gallop with the right leg
foremost, galloped past them, bumping heavily up and down in his short
jacket on the chamois leather of the side saddle. “He’s doing it, Anna
Arkadyevna!” he shouted.

Anna did not even glance at him; but again it seemed to Darya
Alexandrovna out of place to enter upon such a long conversation in the
carriage, and so she cut short her thought.

“I don’t think anything,” she said, “but I always loved you, and if one
loves anyone, one loves the whole person, just as they are and not as
one would like them to be....”

Anna, taking her eyes off her friend’s face and dropping her eyelids
(this was a new habit Dolly had not seen in her before), pondered,
trying to penetrate the full significance of the words. And obviously
interpreting them as she would have wished, she glanced at Dolly.

“If you had any sins,” she said, “they would all be forgiven you for
your coming to see me and these words.”

And Dolly saw that tears stood in her eyes. She pressed Anna’s hand in
silence.

“Well, what are these buildings? How many there are of them!” After a
moment’s silence she repeated her question.

“These are the servants’ houses, barns, and stables,” answered Anna.
“And there the park begins. It had all gone to ruin, but Alexey had
everything renewed. He is very fond of this place, and, what I never
expected, he has become intensely interested in looking after it. But
his is such a rich nature! Whatever he takes up, he does splendidly. So
far from being bored by it, he works with passionate interest. He—with
his temperament as I know it—he has become careful and businesslike, a
first-rate manager, he positively reckons every penny in his management
of the land. But only in that. When it’s a question of tens of
thousands, he doesn’t think of money.” She spoke with that gleefully
sly smile with which women often talk of the secret characteristics
only known to them—of those they love. “Do you see that big building?
that’s the new hospital. I believe it will cost over a hundred
thousand; that’s his hobby just now. And do you know how it all came
about? The peasants asked him for some meadowland, I think it was, at a
cheaper rate, and he refused, and I accused him of being miserly. Of
course it was not really because of that, but everything together, he
began this hospital to prove, do you see, that he was not miserly about
money. _C’est une petitesse_, if you like, but I love him all the more
for it. And now you’ll see the house in a moment. It was his
grandfather’s house, and he has had nothing changed outside.”

“How beautiful!” said Dolly, looking with involuntary admiration at the
handsome house with columns, standing out among the different-colored
greens of the old trees in the garden.

“Isn’t it fine? And from the house, from the top, the view is
wonderful.”

They drove into a courtyard strewn with gravel and bright with flowers,
in which two laborers were at work putting an edging of stones round
the light mould of a flower bed, and drew up in a covered entry.

“Ah, they’re here already!” said Anna, looking at the saddle horses,
which were just being led away from the steps. “It is a nice horse,
isn’t it? It’s my cob; my favorite. Lead him here and bring me some
sugar. Where is the count?” she inquired of two smart footmen who
darted out. “Ah, there he is!” she said, seeing Vronsky coming to meet
her with Veslovsky.

“Where are you going to put the princess?” said Vronsky in French,
addressing Anna, and without waiting for a reply, he once more greeted
Darya Alexandrovna, and this time he kissed her hand. “I think the big
balcony room.”

“Oh, no, that’s too far off! Better in the corner room, we shall see
each other more. Come, let’s go up,” said Anna, as she gave her
favorite horse the sugar the footman had brought her.

“_Et vous oubliez votre devoir_,” she said to Veslovsky, who came out
too on the steps.

“_Pardon, j’en ai tout plein les poches_,” he answered, smiling,
putting his fingers in his waistcoat pocket.

“_Mais vous venez trop tard_,” she said, rubbing her handkerchief on
her hand, which the horse had made wet in taking the sugar.

Anna turned to Dolly. “You can stay some time? For one day only? That’s
impossible!”

“I promised to be back, and the children....” said Dolly, feeling
embarrassed both because she had to get her bag out of the carriage,
and because she knew her face must be covered with dust.

“No, Dolly, darling!... Well, we’ll see. Come along, come along!” and
Anna led Dolly to her room.

That room was not the smart guest chamber Vronsky had suggested, but
the one of which Anna had said that Dolly would excuse it. And this
room, for which excuse was needed, was more full of luxury than any in
which Dolly had ever stayed, a luxury that reminded her of the best
hotels abroad.

“Well, darling, how happy I am!” Anna said, sitting down in her riding
habit for a moment beside Dolly. “Tell me about all of you. Stiva I had
only a glimpse of, and he cannot tell one about the children. How is my
favorite, Tanya? Quite a big girl, I expect?”

“Yes, she’s very tall,” Darya Alexandrovna answered shortly, surprised
herself that she should respond so coolly about her children. “We are
having a delightful stay at the Levins’,” she added.

“Oh, if I had known,” said Anna, “that you do not despise me!... You
might have all come to us. Stiva’s an old friend and a great friend of
Alexey’s, you know,” she added, and suddenly she blushed.

“Yes, but we are all....” Dolly answered in confusion.

“But in my delight I’m talking nonsense. The one thing, darling, is
that I am so glad to have you!” said Anna, kissing her again. “You
haven’t told me yet how and what you think about me, and I keep wanting
to know. But I’m glad you will see me as I am. The chief thing I
shouldn’t like would be for people to imagine I want to prove anything.
I don’t want to prove anything; I merely want to live, to do no one
harm but myself. I have the right to do that, haven’t I? But it is a
big subject, and we’ll talk over everything properly later. Now I’ll go
and dress and send a maid to you.”


Chapter 19

Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna, with a good housewife’s eye, scanned
her room. All she had seen in entering the house and walking through
it, and all she saw now in her room, gave her an impression of wealth
and sumptuousness and of that modern European luxury of which she had
only read in English novels, but had never seen in Russia and in the
country. Everything was new from the new French hangings on the walls
to the carpet which covered the whole floor. The bed had a spring
mattress, and a special sort of bolster and silk pillowcases on the
little pillows. The marble washstand, the dressing table, the little
sofa, the tables, the bronze clock on the chimney piece, the window
curtains, and the _portières_ were all new and expensive.

The smart maid, who came in to offer her services, with her hair done
up high, and a gown more fashionable than Dolly’s, was as new and
expensive as the whole room. Darya Alexandrovna liked her neatness, her
deferential and obliging manners, but she felt ill at ease with her.
She felt ashamed of her seeing the patched dressing jacket that had
unluckily been packed by mistake for her. She was ashamed of the very
patches and darned places of which she had been so proud at home. At
home it had been so clear that for six dressing jackets there would be
needed twenty-four yards of nainsook at sixteen pence the yard, which
was a matter of thirty shillings besides the cutting-out and making,
and these thirty shillings had been saved. But before the maid she
felt, if not exactly ashamed, at least uncomfortable.

Darya Alexandrovna had a great sense of relief when Annushka, whom she
had known for years, walked in. The smart maid was sent for to go to
her mistress, and Annushka remained with Darya Alexandrovna.

Annushka was obviously much pleased at that lady’s arrival, and began
to chatter away without a pause. Dolly observed that she was longing to
express her opinion in regard to her mistress’s position, especially as
to the love and devotion of the count to Anna Arkadyevna, but Dolly
carefully interrupted her whenever she began to speak about this.

“I grew up with Anna Arkadyevna; my lady’s dearer to me than anything.
Well, it’s not for us to judge. And, to be sure, there seems so much
love....”

“Kindly pour out the water for me to wash now, please,” Darya
Alexandrovna cut her short.

“Certainly. We’ve two women kept specially for washing small things,
but most of the linen’s done by machinery. The count goes into
everything himself. Ah, what a husband!...”

Dolly was glad when Anna came in, and by her entrance put a stop to
Annushka’s gossip.

Anna had put on a very simple batiste gown. Dolly scrutinized that
simple gown attentively. She knew what it meant, and the price at which
such simplicity was obtained.

“An old friend,” said Anna of Annushka.

Anna was not embarrassed now. She was perfectly composed and at ease.
Dolly saw that she had now completely recovered from the impression her
arrival had made on her, and had assumed that superficial, careless
tone which, as it were, closed the door on that compartment in which
her deeper feelings and ideas were kept.

“Well, Anna, and how is your little girl?” asked Dolly.

“Annie?” (This was what she called her little daughter Anna.) “Very
well. She has got on wonderfully. Would you like to see her? Come, I’ll
show her to you. We had a terrible bother,” she began telling her,
“over nurses. We had an Italian wet-nurse. A good creature, but so
stupid! We wanted to get rid of her, but the baby is so used to her
that we’ve gone on keeping her still.”

“But how have you managed?...” Dolly was beginning a question as to
what name the little girl would have; but noticing a sudden frown on
Anna’s face, she changed the drift of her question.

“How did you manage? have you weaned her yet?”

But Anna had understood.

“You didn’t mean to ask that? You meant to ask about her surname. Yes?
That worries Alexey. She has no name—that is, she’s a Karenina,” said
Anna, dropping her eyelids till nothing could be seen but the eyelashes
meeting. “But we’ll talk about all that later,” her face suddenly
brightening. “Come, I’ll show you her. _Elle est très gentille_. She
crawls now.”

In the nursery the luxury which had impressed Dolly in the whole house
struck her still more. There were little go-carts ordered from England,
and appliances for learning to walk, and a sofa after the fashion of a
billiard table, purposely constructed for crawling, and swings and
baths, all of special pattern, and modern. They were all English,
solid, and of good make, and obviously very expensive. The room was
large, and very light and lofty.

When they went in, the baby, with nothing on but her little smock, was
sitting in a little elbow chair at the table, having her dinner of
broth, which she was spilling all over her little chest. The baby was
being fed, and the Russian nursery maid was evidently sharing her meal.
Neither the wet-nurse nor the head-nurse were there; they were in the
next room, from which came the sound of their conversation in the queer
French which was their only means of communication.

Hearing Anna’s voice, a smart, tall, English nurse with a disagreeable
face and a dissolute expression walked in at the door, hurriedly
shaking her fair curls, and immediately began to defend herself though
Anna had not found fault with her. At every word Anna said, the English
nurse said hurriedly several times, “Yes, my lady.”

The rosy baby with her black eyebrows and hair, her sturdy red little
body with tight goose-flesh skin, delighted Darya Alexandrovna in spite
of the cross expression with which she stared at the stranger. She
positively envied the baby’s healthy appearance. She was delighted,
too, at the baby’s crawling. Not one of her own children had crawled
like that. When the baby was put on the carpet and its little dress
tucked up behind, it was wonderfully charming. Looking round like some
little wild animal at the grown-up big people with her bright black
eyes, she smiled, unmistakably pleased at their admiring her, and
holding her legs sideways, she pressed vigorously on her arms, and
rapidly drew her whole back up after, and then made another step
forward with her little arms.

But the whole atmosphere of the nursery, and especially the English
nurse, Darya Alexandrovna did not like at all. It was only on the
supposition that no good nurse would have entered so irregular a
household as Anna’s that Darya Alexandrovna could explain to herself
how Anna with her insight into people could take such an
unprepossessing, disreputable-looking woman as nurse to her child.

Besides, from a few words that were dropped, Darya Alexandrovna saw at
once that Anna, the two nurses, and the child had no common existence,
and that the mother’s visit was something exceptional. Anna wanted to
get the baby her plaything, and could not find it.

Most amazing of all was the fact that on being asked how many teeth the
baby had, Anna answered wrong, and knew nothing about the two last
teeth.

“I sometimes feel sorry I’m so superfluous here,” said Anna, going out
of the nursery and holding up her skirt so as to escape the plaything
standing in the doorway. “It was very different with my first child.”

“I expected it to be the other way,” said Darya Alexandrovna shyly.

“Oh, no! By the way, do you know I saw Seryozha?” said Anna, screwing
up her eyes, as though looking at something far away. “But we’ll talk
about that later. You wouldn’t believe it, I’m like a hungry beggar
woman when a full dinner is set before her, and she does not know what
to begin on first. The dinner is you, and the talks I have before me
with you, which I could never have with anyone else; and I don’t know
which subject to begin upon first. _Mais je ne vous ferai grâce de
rien_. I must have everything out with you.”

“Oh, I ought to give you a sketch of the company you will meet with
us,” she went on. “I’ll begin with the ladies. Princess Varvara—you
know her, and I know your opinion and Stiva’s about her. Stiva says the
whole aim of her existence is to prove her superiority over Auntie
Katerina Pavlovna: that’s all true; but she’s a good-natured woman, and
I am so grateful to her. In Petersburg there was a moment when a
chaperon was absolutely essential for me. Then she turned up. But
really she is good-natured. She did a great deal to alleviate my
position. I see you don’t understand all the difficulty of my position
... there in Petersburg,” she added. “Here I’m perfectly at ease and
happy. Well, of that later on, though. Then Sviazhsky—he’s the marshal
of the district, and he’s a very good sort of a man, but he wants to
get something out of Alexey. You understand, with his property, now
that we are settled in the country, Alexey can exercise great
influence. Then there’s Tushkevitch—you have seen him, you know—Betsy’s
admirer. Now he’s been thrown over and he’s come to see us. As Alexey
says, he’s one of those people who are very pleasant if one accepts
them for what they try to appear to be, _et puis il est comme il faut_,
as Princess Varvara says. Then Veslovsky ... you know him. A very nice
boy,” she said, and a sly smile curved her lips. “What’s this wild
story about him and the Levins? Veslovsky told Alexey about it, and we
don’t believe it. _Il est très gentil et naïf_,” she said again with
the same smile. “Men need occupation, and Alexey needs a circle, so I
value all these people. We have to have the house lively and gay, so
that Alexey may not long for any novelty. Then you’ll see the steward—a
German, a very good fellow, and he understands his work. Alexey has a
very high opinion of him. Then the doctor, a young man, not quite a
Nihilist perhaps, but you know, eats with his knife ... but a very good
doctor. Then the architect.... _Une petite cour!_”


Chapter 20

“Here’s Dolly for you, princess, you were so anxious to see her,” said
Anna, coming out with Darya Alexandrovna onto the stone terrace where
Princess Varvara was sitting in the shade at an embroidery frame,
working at a cover for Count Alexey Kirillovitch’s easy chair. “She
says she doesn’t want anything before dinner, but please order some
lunch for her, and I’ll go and look for Alexey and bring them all in.”

Princess Varvara gave Dolly a cordial and rather patronizing reception,
and began at once explaining to her that she was living with Anna
because she had always cared more for her than her sister Katerina
Pavlovna, the aunt that had brought Anna up, and that now, when
everyone had abandoned Anna, she thought it her duty to help her in
this most difficult period of transition.

“Her husband will give her a divorce, and then I shall go back to my
solitude; but now I can be of use, and I am doing my duty, however
difficult it may be for me—not like some other people. And how sweet it
is of you, how right of you to have come! They live like the best of
married couples; it’s for God to judge them, not for us. And didn’t
Biryuzovsky and Madame Avenieva ... and Sam Nikandrov, and Vassiliev
and Madame Mamonova, and Liza Neptunova.... Did no one say anything
about them? And it has ended by their being received by everyone. And
then, _c’est un intérieur si joli, si comme il faut. Tout-à-fait à
l’anglaise. On se réunit le matin au breakfast, et puis on se sépare._
Everyone does as he pleases till dinner time. Dinner at seven o’clock.
Stiva did very rightly to send you. He needs their support. You know
that through his mother and brother he can do anything. And then they
do so much good. He didn’t tell you about his hospital? _Ce sera
admirable_—everything from Paris.”

Their conversation was interrupted by Anna, who had found the men of
the party in the billiard room, and returned with them to the terrace.
There was still a long time before the dinner-hour, it was exquisite
weather, and so several different methods of spending the next two
hours were proposed. There were very many methods of passing the time
at Vozdvizhenskoe, and these were all unlike those in use at
Pokrovskoe.

“_Une partie de lawn-tennis,_” Veslovsky proposed, with his handsome
smile. “We’ll be partners again, Anna Arkadyevna.”

“No, it’s too hot; better stroll about the garden and have a row in the
boat, show Darya Alexandrovna the river banks.” Vronsky proposed.

“I agree to anything,” said Sviazhsky.

“I imagine that what Dolly would like best would be a stroll—wouldn’t
you? And then the boat, perhaps,” said Anna.

So it was decided. Veslovsky and Tushkevitch went off to the bathing
place, promising to get the boat ready and to wait there for them.

They walked along the path in two couples, Anna with Sviazhsky, and
Dolly with Vronsky. Dolly was a little embarrassed and anxious in the
new surroundings in which she found herself. Abstractly, theoretically,
she did not merely justify, she positively approved of Anna’s conduct.
As is indeed not unfrequent with women of unimpeachable virtue, weary
of the monotony of respectable existence, at a distance she not only
excused illicit love, she positively envied it. Besides, she loved Anna
with all her heart. But seeing Anna in actual life among these
strangers, with this fashionable tone that was so new to Darya
Alexandrovna, she felt ill at ease. What she disliked particularly was
seeing Princess Varvara ready to overlook everything for the sake of
the comforts she enjoyed.

As a general principle, abstractly, Dolly approved of Anna’s action;
but to see the man for whose sake her action had been taken was
disagreeable to her. Moreover, she had never liked Vronsky. She thought
him very proud, and saw nothing in him of which he could be proud
except his wealth. But against her own will, here in his own house, he
overawed her more than ever, and she could not be at ease with him. She
felt with him the same feeling she had had with the maid about her
dressing jacket. Just as with the maid she had felt not exactly
ashamed, but embarrassed at her darns, so she felt with him not exactly
ashamed, but embarrassed at herself.

Dolly was ill at ease, and tried to find a subject of conversation.
Even though she supposed that, through his pride, praise of his house
and garden would be sure to be disagreeable to him, she did all the
same tell him how much she liked his house.

“Yes, it’s a very fine building, and in the good old-fashioned style,”
he said.

“I like so much the court in front of the steps. Was that always so?”

“Oh, no!” he said, and his face beamed with pleasure. “If you could
only have seen that court last spring!”

And he began, at first rather diffidently, but more and more carried
away by the subject as he went on, to draw her attention to the various
details of the decoration of his house and garden. It was evident that,
having devoted a great deal of trouble to improve and beautify his
home, Vronsky felt a need to show off the improvements to a new person,
and was genuinely delighted at Darya Alexandrovna’s praise.

“If you would care to look at the hospital, and are not tired, indeed,
it’s not far. Shall we go?” he said, glancing into her face to convince
himself that she was not bored. “Are you coming, Anna?” he turned to
her.

“We will come, won’t we?” she said, addressing Sviazhsky. “_Mais il ne
faut pas laisser le pauvre Veslovsky et Tushkevitch se morfondre là
dans le bateau._ We must send and tell them.”

“Yes, this is a monument he is setting up here,” said Anna, turning to
Dolly with that sly smile of comprehension with which she had
previously talked about the hospital.

“Oh, it’s a work of real importance!” said Sviazhsky. But to show he
was not trying to ingratiate himself with Vronsky, he promptly added
some slightly critical remarks.

“I wonder, though, count,” he said, “that while you do so much for the
health of the peasants, you take so little interest in the schools.”

“_C’est devenu tellement commun les écoles,_” said Vronsky. “You
understand it’s not on that account, but it just happens so, my
interest has been diverted elsewhere. This way then to the hospital,”
he said to Darya Alexandrovna, pointing to a turning out of the avenue.

The ladies put up their parasols and turned into the side path. After
going down several turnings, and going through a little gate, Darya
Alexandrovna saw standing on rising ground before her a large
pretentious-looking red building, almost finished. The iron roof, which
was not yet painted, shone with dazzling brightness in the sunshine.
Beside the finished building another had been begun, surrounded by
scaffolding. Workmen in aprons, standing on scaffolds, were laying
bricks, pouring mortar out of vats, and smoothing it with trowels.

“How quickly work gets done with you!” said Sviazhsky. “When I was here
last time the roof was not on.”

“By the autumn it will all be ready. Inside almost everything is done,”
said Anna.

“And what’s this new building?”

“That’s the house for the doctor and the dispensary,” answered Vronsky,
seeing the architect in a short jacket coming towards him; and excusing
himself to the ladies, he went to meet him.

Going round a hole where the workmen were slaking lime, he stood still
with the architect and began talking rather warmly.

“The front is still too low,” he said to Anna, who had asked what was
the matter.

“I said the foundation ought to be raised,” said Anna.

“Yes, of course it would have been much better, Anna Arkadyevna,” said
the architect, “but now it’s too late.”

“Yes, I take a great interest in it,” Anna answered Sviazhsky, who was
expressing his surprise at her knowledge of architecture. “This new
building ought to have been in harmony with the hospital. It was an
afterthought, and was begun without a plan.”

Vronsky, having finished his talk with the architect, joined the
ladies, and led them inside the hospital.

Although they were still at work on the cornices outside and were
painting on the ground floor, upstairs almost all the rooms were
finished. Going up the broad cast-iron staircase to the landing, they
walked into the first large room. The walls were stuccoed to look like
marble, the huge plate-glass windows were already in, only the parquet
floor was not yet finished, and the carpenters, who were planing a
block of it, left their work, taking off the bands that fastened their
hair, to greet the gentry.

“This is the reception room,” said Vronsky. “Here there will be a desk,
tables, and benches, and nothing more.”

“This way; let us go in here. Don’t go near the window,” said Anna,
trying the paint to see if it were dry. “Alexey, the paint’s dry
already,” she added.

From the reception room they went into the corridor. Here Vronsky
showed them the mechanism for ventilation on a novel system. Then he
showed them marble baths, and beds with extraordinary springs. Then he
showed them the wards one after another, the storeroom, the linen room,
then the heating stove of a new pattern, then the trolleys, which would
make no noise as they carried everything needed along the corridors,
and many other things. Sviazhsky, as a connoisseur in the latest
mechanical improvements, appreciated everything fully. Dolly simply
wondered at all she had not seen before, and, anxious to understand it
all, made minute inquiries about everything, which gave Vronsky great
satisfaction.

“Yes, I imagine that this will be the solitary example of a properly
fitted hospital in Russia,” said Sviazhsky.

“And won’t you have a lying-in ward?” asked Dolly. “That’s so much
needed in the country. I have often....”

In spite of his usual courtesy, Vronsky interrupted her.

“This is not a lying-in home, but a hospital for the sick, and is
intended for all diseases, except infectious complaints,” he said. “Ah!
look at this,” and he rolled up to Darya Alexandrovna an invalid chair
that had just been ordered for the convalescents. “Look.” He sat down
in the chair and began moving it. “The patient can’t walk—still too
weak, perhaps, or something wrong with his legs, but he must have air,
and he moves, rolls himself along....”

Darya Alexandrovna was interested by everything. She liked everything
very much, but most of all she liked Vronsky himself with his natural,
simple-hearted eagerness. “Yes, he’s a very nice, good man,” she
thought several times, not hearing what he said, but looking at him and
penetrating into his expression, while she mentally put herself in
Anna’s place. She liked him so much just now with his eager interest
that she saw how Anna could be in love with him.


Chapter 21

“No, I think the princess is tired, and horses don’t interest her,”
Vronsky said to Anna, who wanted to go on to the stables, where
Sviazhsky wished to see the new stallion. “You go on, while I escort
the princess home, and we’ll have a little talk,” he said, “if you
would like that?” he added, turning to her.

“I know nothing about horses, and I shall be delighted,” answered Darya
Alexandrovna, rather astonished.

She saw by Vronsky’s face that he wanted something from her. She was
not mistaken. As soon as they had passed through the little gate back
into the garden, he looked in the direction Anna had taken, and having
made sure that she could neither hear nor see them, he began:

“You guess that I have something I want to say to you,” he said,
looking at her with laughing eyes. “I am not wrong in believing you to
be a friend of Anna’s.” He took off his hat, and taking out his
handkerchief, wiped his head, which was growing bald.

Darya Alexandrovna made no answer, and merely stared at him with
dismay. When she was left alone with him, she suddenly felt afraid; his
laughing eyes and stern expression scared her.

The most diverse suppositions as to what he was about to speak of to
her flashed into her brain. “He is going to beg me to come to stay with
them with the children, and I shall have to refuse; or to create a set
that will receive Anna in Moscow.... Or isn’t it Vassenka Veslovsky and
his relations with Anna? Or perhaps about Kitty, that he feels he was
to blame?” All her conjectures were unpleasant, but she did not guess
what he really wanted to talk about to her.

“You have so much influence with Anna, she is so fond of you,” he said;
“do help me.”

Darya Alexandrovna looked with timid inquiry into his energetic face,
which under the lime-trees was continually being lighted up in patches
by the sunshine, and then passing into complete shadow again. She
waited for him to say more, but he walked in silence beside her,
scratching with his cane in the gravel.

“You have come to see us, you, the only woman of Anna’s former
friends—I don’t count Princess Varvara—but I know that you have done
this not because you regard our position as normal, but because,
understanding all the difficulty of the position, you still love her
and want to be a help to her. Have I understood you rightly?” he asked,
looking round at her.

“Oh, yes,” answered Darya Alexandrovna, putting down her sunshade,
“but....”

“No,” he broke in, and unconsciously, oblivious of the awkward position
into which he was putting his companion, he stopped abruptly, so that
she had to stop short too. “No one feels more deeply and intensely than
I do all the difficulty of Anna’s position; and that you may well
understand, if you do me the honor of supposing I have any heart. I am
to blame for that position, and that is why I feel it.”

“I understand,” said Darya Alexandrovna, involuntarily admiring the
sincerity and firmness with which he said this. “But just because you
feel yourself responsible, you exaggerate it, I am afraid,” she said.
“Her position in the world is difficult, I can well understand.”

“In the world it is hell!” he brought out quickly, frowning darkly.
“You can’t imagine moral sufferings greater than what she went through
in Petersburg in that fortnight ... and I beg you to believe it.”

“Yes, but here, so long as neither Anna ... nor you miss society....”

“Society!” he said contemptuously, “how could I miss society?”

“So far—and it may be so always—you are happy and at peace. I see in
Anna that she is happy, perfectly happy, she has had time to tell me so
much already,” said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling; and involuntarily, as
she said this, at the same moment a doubt entered her mind whether Anna
really were happy.

But Vronsky, it appeared, had no doubts on that score.

“Yes, yes,” he said, “I know that she has revived after all her
sufferings; she is happy. She is happy in the present. But I?... I am
afraid of what is before us ... I beg your pardon, you would like to
walk on?”

“No, I don’t mind.”

“Well, then, let us sit here.”

Darya Alexandrovna sat down on a garden seat in a corner of the avenue.
He stood up facing her.

“I see that she is happy,” he repeated, and the doubt whether she were
happy sank more deeply into Darya Alexandrovna’s mind. “But can it
last? Whether we have acted rightly or wrongly is another question, but
the die is cast,” he said, passing from Russian to French, “and we are
bound together for life. We are united by all the ties of love that we
hold most sacred. We have a child, we may have other children. But the
law and all the conditions of our position are such that thousands of
complications arise which she does not see and does not want to see.
And that one can well understand. But I can’t help seeing them. My
daughter is by law not my daughter, but Karenin’s. I cannot bear this
falsity!” he said, with a vigorous gesture of refusal, and he looked
with gloomy inquiry towards Darya Alexandrovna.

She made no answer, but simply gazed at him. He went on:

“One day a son may be born, my son, and he will be legally a Karenin;
he will not be the heir of my name nor of my property, and however
happy we may be in our home life and however many children we may have,
there will be no real tie between us. They will be Karenins. You can
understand the bitterness and horror of this position! I have tried to
speak of this to Anna. It irritates her. She does not understand, and
to her I cannot speak plainly of all this. Now look at another side. I
am happy, happy in her love, but I must have occupation. I have found
occupation, and am proud of what I am doing and consider it nobler than
the pursuits of my former companions at court and in the army. And most
certainly I would not change the work I am doing for theirs. I am
working here, settled in my own place, and I am happy and contented,
and we need nothing more to make us happy. I love my work here. _Ce
n’est pas un pis-aller,_ on the contrary....”

Darya Alexandrovna noticed that at this point in his explanation he
grew confused, and she did not quite understand this digression, but
she felt that having once begun to speak of matters near his heart, of
which he could not speak to Anna, he was now making a clean breast of
everything, and that the question of his pursuits in the country fell
into the same category of matters near his heart, as the question of
his relations with Anna.

“Well, I will go on,” he said, collecting himself. “The great thing is
that as I work I want to have a conviction that what I am doing will
not die with me, that I shall have heirs to come after me,—and this I
have not. Conceive the position of a man who knows that his children,
the children of the woman he loves, will not be his, but will belong to
someone who hates them and cares nothing about them! It is awful!”

He paused, evidently much moved.

“Yes, indeed, I see that. But what can Anna do?” queried Darya
Alexandrovna.

“Yes, that brings me to the object of my conversation,” he said,
calming himself with an effort. “Anna can, it depends on her.... Even
to petition the Tsar for legitimization, a divorce is essential. And
that depends on Anna. Her husband agreed to a divorce—at that time your
husband had arranged it completely. And now, I know, he would not
refuse it. It is only a matter of writing to him. He said plainly at
that time that if she expressed the desire, he would not refuse. Of
course,” he said gloomily, “it is one of those Pharisaical cruelties of
which only such heartless men are capable. He knows what agony any
recollection of him must give her, and knowing her, he must have a
letter from her. I can understand that it is agony to her. But the
matter is of such importance, that one must _passer par-dessus toutes
ces finesses de sentiment. Il y va du bonheur et de l’existence d’Anne
et de ses enfants._ I won’t speak of myself, though it’s hard for me,
very hard,” he said, with an expression as though he were threatening
someone for its being hard for him. “And so it is, princess, that I am
shamelessly clutching at you as an anchor of salvation. Help me to
persuade her to write to him and ask for a divorce.”

“Yes, of course,” Darya Alexandrovna said dreamily, as she vividly
recalled her last interview with Alexey Alexandrovitch. “Yes, of
course,” she repeated with decision, thinking of Anna.

“Use your influence with her, make her write. I don’t like—I’m almost
unable to speak about this to her.”

“Very well, I will talk to her. But how is it she does not think of it
herself?” said Darya Alexandrovna, and for some reason she suddenly at
that point recalled Anna’s strange new habit of half-closing her eyes.
And she remembered that Anna drooped her eyelids just when the deeper
questions of life were touched upon. “Just as though she half-shut her
eyes to her own life, so as not to see everything,” thought Dolly.
“Yes, indeed, for my own sake and for hers I will talk to her,” Dolly
said in reply to his look of gratitude.

They got up and walked to the house.


Chapter 22

When Anna found Dolly at home before her, she looked intently in her
eyes, as though questioning her about the talk she had had with
Vronsky, but she made no inquiry in words.

“I believe it’s dinner time,” she said. “We’ve not seen each other at
all yet. I am reckoning on the evening. Now I want to go and dress. I
expect you do too; we all got splashed at the buildings.”

Dolly went to her room and she felt amused. To change her dress was
impossible, for she had already put on her best dress. But in order to
signify in some way her preparation for dinner, she asked the maid to
brush her dress, changed her cuffs and tie, and put some lace on her
head.

“This is all I can do,” she said with a smile to Anna, who came in to
her in a third dress, again of extreme simplicity.

“Yes, we are too formal here,” she said, as it were apologizing for her
magnificence. “Alexey is delighted at your visit, as he rarely is at
anything. He has completely lost his heart to you,” she added. “You’re
not tired?”

There was no time for talking about anything before dinner. Going into
the drawing-room they found Princess Varvara already there, and the
gentlemen of the party in black frock-coats. The architect wore a
swallow-tail coat. Vronsky presented the doctor and the steward to his
guest. The architect he had already introduced to her at the hospital.

A stout butler, resplendent with a smoothly shaven round chin and a
starched white cravat, announced that dinner was ready, and the ladies
got up. Vronsky asked Sviazhsky to take in Anna Arkadyevna, and himself
offered his arm to Dolly. Veslovsky was before Tushkevitch in offering
his arm to Princess Varvara, so that Tushkevitch with the steward and
the doctor walked in alone.

The dinner, the dining-room, the service, the waiting at table, the
wine, and the food, were not simply in keeping with the general tone of
modern luxury throughout all the house, but seemed even more sumptuous
and modern. Darya Alexandrovna watched this luxury which was novel to
her, and as a good housekeeper used to managing a household—although
she never dreamed of adapting anything she saw to her own household, as
it was all in a style of luxury far above her own manner of living—she
could not help scrutinizing every detail, and wondering how and by whom
it was all done. Vassenka Veslovsky, her husband, and even Sviazhsky,
and many other people she knew, would never have considered this
question, and would have readily believed what every well-bred host
tries to make his guests feel, that is, that all that is well-ordered
in his house has cost him, the host, no trouble whatever, but comes of
itself. Darya Alexandrovna was well aware that even porridge for the
children’s breakfast does not come of itself, and that therefore, where
so complicated and magnificent a style of luxury was maintained,
someone must give earnest attention to its organization. And from the
glance with which Alexey Kirillovitch scanned the table, from the way
he nodded to the butler, and offered Darya Alexandrovna her choice
between cold soup and hot soup, she saw that it was all organized and
maintained by the care of the master of the house himself. It was
evident that it all rested no more upon Anna than upon Veslovsky. She,
Sviazhsky, the princess, and Veslovsky, were equally guests, with light
hearts enjoying what had been arranged for them.

Anna was the hostess only in conducting the conversation. The
conversation was a difficult one for the lady of the house at a small
table with persons present, like the steward and the architect,
belonging to a completely different world, struggling not to be
overawed by an elegance to which they were unaccustomed, and unable to
sustain a large share in the general conversation. But this difficult
conversation Anna directed with her usual tact and naturalness, and
indeed she did so with actual enjoyment, as Darya Alexandrovna
observed. The conversation began about the row Tushkevitch and
Veslovsky had taken alone together in the boat, and Tushkevitch began
describing the last boat races in Petersburg at the Yacht Club. But
Anna, seizing the first pause, at once turned to the architect to draw
him out of his silence.

“Nikolay Ivanitch was struck,” she said, meaning Sviazhsky, “at the
progress the new building had made since he was here last; but I am
there every day, and every day I wonder at the rate at which it grows.”

“It’s first-rate working with his excellency,” said the architect with
a smile (he was respectful and composed, though with a sense of his own
dignity). “It’s a very different matter to have to do with the district
authorities. Where one would have to write out sheaves of papers, here
I call upon the count, and in three words we settle the business.”

“The American way of doing business,” said Sviazhsky, with a smile.

“Yes, there they build in a rational fashion....”

The conversation passed to the misuse of political power in the United
States, but Anna quickly brought it round to another topic, so as to
draw the steward into talk.

“Have you ever seen a reaping machine?” she said, addressing Darya
Alexandrovna. “We had just ridden over to look at one when we met. It’s
the first time I ever saw one.”

“How do they work?” asked Dolly.

“Exactly like little scissors. A plank and a lot of little scissors.
Like this.”

Anna took a knife and fork in her beautiful white hands covered with
rings, and began showing how the machine worked. It was clear that she
saw nothing would be understood from her explanation; but aware that
her talk was pleasant and her hands beautiful she went on explaining.

“More like little penknives,” Veslovsky said playfully, never taking
his eyes off her.

Anna gave a just perceptible smile, but made no answer. “Isn’t it true,
Karl Fedoritch, that it’s just like little scissors?” she said to the
steward.

“_Oh, ja,_” answered the German. _“Es ist ein ganz einfaches Ding,”_
and he began to explain the construction of the machine.

“It’s a pity it doesn’t bind too. I saw one at the Vienna exhibition,
which binds with a wire,” said Sviazhsky. “They would be more
profitable in use.”

_“Es kommt drauf an.... Der Preis vom Draht muss ausgerechnet werden.”_
And the German, roused from his taciturnity, turned to Vronsky. _“Das
lässt sich ausrechnen, Erlaucht.”_ The German was just feeling in the
pocket where were his pencil and the notebook he always wrote in, but
recollecting that he was at a dinner, and observing Vronsky’s chilly
glance, he checked himself. _“Zu compliziert, macht zu viel Klopot,”_
he concluded.

_“Wünscht man Dochots, so hat man auch Klopots,”_ said Vassenka
Veslovsky, mimicking the German. _“J’adore l’allemand,”_ he addressed
Anna again with the same smile.

_“Cessez,”_ she said with playful severity.

“We expected to find you in the fields, Vassily Semyonitch,” she said
to the doctor, a sickly-looking man; “have you been there?”

“I went there, but I had taken flight,” the doctor answered with gloomy
jocoseness.

“Then you’ve taken a good constitutional?”

“Splendid!”

“Well, and how was the old woman? I hope it’s not typhus?”

“Typhus it is not, but it’s taking a bad turn.”

“What a pity!” said Anna, and having thus paid the dues of civility to
her domestic circle, she turned to her own friends.

“It would be a hard task, though, to construct a machine from your
description, Anna Arkadyevna,” Sviazhsky said jestingly.

“Oh, no, why so?” said Anna with a smile that betrayed that she knew
there was something charming in her disquisitions upon the machine that
had been noticed by Sviazhsky. This new trait of girlish coquettishness
made an unpleasant impression on Dolly.

“But Anna Arkadyevna’s knowledge of architecture is marvelous,” said
Tushkevitch.

“To be sure, I heard Anna Arkadyevna talking yesterday about plinths
and damp-courses,” said Veslovsky. “Have I got it right?”

“There’s nothing marvelous about it, when one sees and hears so much of
it,” said Anna. “But, I dare say, you don’t even know what houses are
made of?”

Darya Alexandrovna saw that Anna disliked the tone of raillery that
existed between her and Veslovsky, but fell in with it against her
will.

Vronsky acted in this matter quite differently from Levin. He obviously
attached no significance to Veslovsky’s chattering; on the contrary, he
encouraged his jests.

“Come now, tell us, Veslovsky, how are the stones held together?”

“By cement, of course.”

“Bravo! And what is cement?”

“Oh, some sort of paste ... no, putty,” said Veslovsky, raising a
general laugh.

The company at dinner, with the exception of the doctor, the architect,
and the steward, who remained plunged in gloomy silence, kept up a
conversation that never paused, glancing off one subject, fastening on
another, and at times stinging one or the other to the quick. Once
Darya Alexandrovna felt wounded to the quick, and got so hot that she
positively flushed and wondered afterwards whether she had said
anything extreme or unpleasant. Sviazhsky began talking of Levin,
describing his strange view that machinery is simply pernicious in its
effects on Russian agriculture.

“I have not the pleasure of knowing this M. Levin,” Vronsky said,
smiling, “but most likely he has never seen the machines he condemns;
or if he has seen and tried any, it must have been after a queer
fashion, some Russian imitation, not a machine from abroad. What sort
of views can anyone have on such a subject?”

“Turkish views, in general,” Veslovsky said, turning to Anna with a
smile.

“I can’t defend his opinions,” Darya Alexandrovna said, firing up; “but
I can say that he’s a highly cultivated man, and if he were here he
would know very well how to answer you, though I am not capable of
doing so.”

“I like him extremely, and we are great friends,” Sviazhsky said,
smiling good-naturedly. “_Mais pardon, il est un petit peu toqué;_ he
maintains, for instance, that district councils and arbitration boards
are all of no use, and he is unwilling to take part in anything.”

“It’s our Russian apathy,” said Vronsky, pouring water from an iced
decanter into a delicate glass on a high stem; “we’ve no sense of the
duties our privileges impose upon us, and so we refuse to recognize
these duties.”

“I know no man more strict in the performance of his duties,” said
Darya Alexandrovna, irritated by Vronsky’s tone of superiority.

“For my part,” pursued Vronsky, who was evidently for some reason or
other keenly affected by this conversation, “such as I am, I am, on the
contrary, extremely grateful for the honor they have done me, thanks to
Nikolay Ivanitch” (he indicated Sviazhsky), “in electing me a justice
of the peace. I consider that for me the duty of being present at the
session, of judging some peasants’ quarrel about a horse, is as
important as anything I can do. And I shall regard it as an honor if
they elect me for the district council. It’s only in that way I can pay
for the advantages I enjoy as a landowner. Unluckily they don’t
understand the weight that the big landowners ought to have in the
state.”

It was strange to Darya Alexandrovna to hear how serenely confident he
was of being right at his own table. She thought how Levin, who
believed the opposite, was just as positive in his opinions at his own
table. But she loved Levin, and so she was on his side.

“So we can reckon upon you, count, for the coming elections?” said
Sviazhsky. “But you must come a little beforehand, so as to be on the
spot by the eighth. If you would do me the honor to stop with me.”

“I rather agree with your _beau-frère_,” said Anna, “though not quite
on the same ground as he,” she added with a smile. “I’m afraid that we
have too many of these public duties in these latter days. Just as in
old days there were so many government functionaries that one had to
call in a functionary for every single thing, so now everyone’s doing
some sort of public duty. Alexey has been here now six months, and he’s
a member, I do believe, of five or six different public bodies. _Du
train que cela va,_ the whole time will be wasted on it. And I’m afraid
that with such a multiplicity of these bodies, they’ll end in being a
mere form. How many are you a member of, Nikolay Ivanitch?” she turned
to Sviazhsky—“over twenty, I fancy.”

Anna spoke lightly, but irritation could be discerned in her tone.
Darya Alexandrovna, watching Anna and Vronsky attentively, detected it
instantly. She noticed, too, that as she spoke Vronsky’s face had
immediately taken a serious and obstinate expression. Noticing this,
and that Princess Varvara at once made haste to change the conversation
by talking of Petersburg acquaintances, and remembering what Vronsky
had without apparent connection said in the garden of his work in the
country, Dolly surmised that this question of public activity was
connected with some deep private disagreement between Anna and Vronsky.

The dinner, the wine, the decoration of the table were all very good;
but it was all like what Darya Alexandrovna had seen at formal dinners
and balls which of late years had become quite unfamiliar to her; it
all had the same impersonal and constrained character, and so on an
ordinary day and in a little circle of friends it made a disagreeable
impression on her.

After dinner they sat on the terrace, then they proceeded to play lawn
tennis. The players, divided into two parties, stood on opposite sides
of a tightly drawn net with gilt poles on the carefully leveled and
rolled croquet-ground. Darya Alexandrovna made an attempt to play, but
it was a long time before she could understand the game, and by the
time she did understand it, she was so tired that she sat down with
Princess Varvara and simply looked on at the players. Her partner,
Tushkevitch, gave up playing too, but the others kept the game up for a
long time. Sviazhsky and Vronsky both played very well and seriously.
They kept a sharp lookout on the balls served to them, and without
haste or getting in each other’s way, they ran adroitly up to them,
waited for the rebound, and neatly and accurately returned them over
the net. Veslovsky played worse than the others. He was too eager, but
he kept the players lively with his high spirits. His laughter and
outcries never paused. Like the other men of the party, with the
ladies’ permission, he took off his coat, and his solid, comely figure
in his white shirt-sleeves, with his red perspiring face and his
impulsive movements, made a picture that imprinted itself vividly on
the memory.

When Darya Alexandrovna lay in bed that night, as soon as she closed
her eyes, she saw Vassenka Veslovsky flying about the croquet ground.

During the game Darya Alexandrovna was not enjoying herself. She did
not like the light tone of raillery that was kept up all the time
between Vassenka Veslovsky and Anna, and the unnaturalness altogether
of grown-up people, all alone without children, playing at a child’s
game. But to avoid breaking up the party and to get through the time
somehow, after a rest she joined the game again, and pretended to be
enjoying it. All that day it seemed to her as though she were acting in
a theater with actors cleverer than she, and that her bad acting was
spoiling the whole performance. She had come with the intention of
staying two days, if all went well. But in the evening, during the
game, she made up her mind that she would go home next day. The
maternal cares and worries, which she had so hated on the way, now,
after a day spent without them, struck her in quite another light, and
tempted her back to them.

When, after evening tea and a row by night in the boat, Darya
Alexandrovna went alone to her room, took off her dress, and began
arranging her thin hair for the night, she had a great sense of relief.

It was positively disagreeable to her to think that Anna was coming to
see her immediately. She longed to be alone with her own thoughts.


Chapter 23

Dolly was wanting to go to bed when Anna came in to see her, attired
for the night. In the course of the day Anna had several times begun to
speak of matters near her heart, and every time after a few words she
had stopped: “Afterwards, by ourselves, we’ll talk about everything.
I’ve got so much I want to tell you,” she said.

Now they were by themselves, and Anna did not know what to talk about.
She sat in the window looking at Dolly, and going over in her own mind
all the stores of intimate talk which had seemed so inexhaustible
beforehand, and she found nothing. At that moment it seemed to her that
everything had been said already.

“Well, what of Kitty?” she said with a heavy sigh, looking penitently
at Dolly. “Tell me the truth, Dolly: isn’t she angry with me?”

“Angry? Oh, no!” said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling.

“But she hates me, despises me?”

“Oh, no! But you know that sort of thing isn’t forgiven.”

“Yes, yes,” said Anna, turning away and looking out of the open window.
“But I was not to blame. And who is to blame? What’s the meaning of
being to blame? Could it have been otherwise? What do you think? Could
it possibly have happened that you didn’t become the wife of Stiva?”

“Really, I don’t know. But this is what I want you to tell me....”

“Yes, yes, but we’ve not finished about Kitty. Is she happy? He’s a
very nice man, they say.”

“He’s much more than very nice. I don’t know a better man.”

“Ah, how glad I am! I’m so glad! Much more than very nice,” she
repeated.

Dolly smiled.

“But tell me about yourself. We’ve a great deal to talk about. And I’ve
had a talk with....” Dolly did not know what to call him. She felt it
awkward to call him either the count or Alexey Kirillovitch.

“With Alexey,” said Anna, “I know what you talked about. But I wanted
to ask you directly what you think of me, of my life?”

“How am I to say like that straight off? I really don’t know.”

“No, tell me all the same.... You see my life. But you mustn’t forget
that you’re seeing us in the summer, when you have come to us and we
are not alone.... But we came here early in the spring, lived quite
alone, and shall be alone again, and I desire nothing better. But
imagine me living alone without him, alone, and that will be ... I see
by everything that it will often be repeated, that he will be half the
time away from home,” she said, getting up and sitting down close by
Dolly.

“Of course,” she interrupted Dolly, who would have answered, “of course
I won’t try to keep him by force. I don’t keep him indeed. The races
are just coming, his horses are running, he will go. I’m very glad. But
think of me, fancy my position.... But what’s the use of talking about
it?” She smiled. “Well, what did he talk about with you?”

“He spoke of what I want to speak about of myself, and it’s easy for me
to be his advocate; of whether there is not a possibility ... whether
you could not....” (Darya Alexandrovna hesitated) “correct, improve
your position.... You know how I look at it.... But all the same, if
possible, you should get married....”

“Divorce, you mean?” said Anna. “Do you know, the only woman who came
to see me in Petersburg was Betsy Tverskaya? You know her, of course?
_Au fond, c’est la femme la plus depravée qui existe._ She had an
intrigue with Tushkevitch, deceiving her husband in the basest way. And
she told me that she did not care to know me so long as my position was
irregular. Don’t imagine I would compare ... I know you, darling. But I
could not help remembering.... Well, so what did he say to you?” she
repeated.

“He said that he was unhappy on your account and his own. Perhaps you
will say that it’s egoism, but what a legitimate and noble egoism. He
wants first of all to legitimize his daughter, and to be your husband,
to have a legal right to you.”

“What wife, what slave can be so utterly a slave as I, in my position?”
she put in gloomily.

“The chief thing he desires ... he desires that you should not suffer.”

“That’s impossible. Well?”

“Well, and the most legitimate desire—he wishes that your children
should have a name.”

“What children?” Anna said, not looking at Dolly, and half closing her
eyes.

“Annie and those to come....”

“He need not trouble on that score; I shall have no more children.”

“How can you tell that you won’t?”

“I shall not, because I don’t wish it.” And, in spite of all her
emotion, Anna smiled, as she caught the naïve expression of curiosity,
wonder, and horror on Dolly’s face.

“The doctor told me after my illness....”

“Impossible!” said Dolly, opening her eyes wide.

For her this was one of those discoveries the consequences and
deductions from which are so immense that all that one feels for the
first instant is that it is impossible to take it all in, and that one
will have to reflect a great, great deal upon it.

This discovery, suddenly throwing light on all those families of one or
two children, which had hitherto been so incomprehensible to her,
aroused so many ideas, reflections, and contradictory emotions, that
she had nothing to say, and simply gazed with wide-open eyes of wonder
at Anna. This was the very thing she had been dreaming of, but now
learning that it was possible, she was horrified. She felt that it was
too simple a solution of too complicated a problem.

_“N’est-ce pas immoral?”_ was all she said, after a brief pause.

“Why so? Think, I have a choice between two alternatives: either to be
with child, that is an invalid, or to be the friend and companion of my
husband—practically my husband,” Anna said in a tone intentionally
superficial and frivolous.

“Yes, yes,” said Darya Alexandrovna, hearing the very arguments she had
used to herself, and not finding the same force in them as before.

“For you, for other people,” said Anna, as though divining her
thoughts, “there may be reason to hesitate; but for me.... You must
consider, I am not his wife; he loves me as long as he loves me. And
how am I to keep his love? Not like this!”

She moved her white hands in a curve before her waist with
extraordinary rapidity, as happens during moments of excitement; ideas
and memories rushed into Darya Alexandrovna’s head. “I,” she thought,
“did not keep my attraction for Stiva; he left me for others, and the
first woman for whom he betrayed me did not keep him by being always
pretty and lively. He deserted her and took another. And can Anna
attract and keep Count Vronsky in that way? If that is what he looks
for, he will find dresses and manners still more attractive and
charming. And however white and beautiful her bare arms are, however
beautiful her full figure and her eager face under her black curls, he
will find something better still, just as my disgusting, pitiful, and
charming husband does.”

Dolly made no answer, she merely sighed. Anna noticed this sigh,
indicating dissent, and she went on. In her armory she had other
arguments so strong that no answer could be made to them.

“Do you say that it’s not right? But you must consider,” she went on;
“you forget my position. How can I desire children? I’m not speaking of
the suffering, I’m not afraid of that. Think only, what are my children
to be? Ill-fated children, who will have to bear a stranger’s name. For
the very fact of their birth they will be forced to be ashamed of their
mother, their father, their birth.”

“But that is just why a divorce is necessary.” But Anna did not hear
her. She longed to give utterance to all the arguments with which she
had so many times convinced herself.

“What is reason given me for, if I am not to use it to avoid bringing
unhappy beings into the world!” She looked at Dolly, but without
waiting for a reply she went on:

“I should always feel I had wronged these unhappy children,” she said.
“If they are not, at any rate they are not unhappy; while if they are
unhappy, I alone should be to blame for it.”

These were the very arguments Darya Alexandrovna had used in her own
reflections; but she heard them without understanding them. “How can
one wrong creatures that don’t exist?” she thought. And all at once the
idea struck her: could it possibly, under any circumstances, have been
better for her favorite Grisha if he had never existed? And this seemed
to her so wild, so strange, that she shook her head to drive away this
tangle of whirling, mad ideas.

“No, I don’t know; it’s not right,” was all she said, with an
expression of disgust on her face.

“Yes, but you mustn’t forget that you and I.... And besides that,”
added Anna, in spite of the wealth of her arguments and the poverty of
Dolly’s objections, seeming still to admit that it was not right,
“don’t forget the chief point, that I am not now in the same position
as you. For you the question is: do you desire not to have any more
children; while for me it is: do I desire to have them? And that’s a
great difference. You must see that I can’t desire it in my position.”

Darya Alexandrovna made no reply. She suddenly felt that she had got
far away from Anna; that there lay between them a barrier of questions
on which they could never agree, and about which it was better not to
speak.


Chapter 24

“Then there is all the more reason for you to legalize your position,
if possible,” said Dolly.

“Yes, if possible,” said Anna, speaking all at once in an utterly
different tone, subdued and mournful.

“Surely you don’t mean a divorce is impossible? I was told your husband
had consented to it.”

“Dolly, I don’t want to talk about that.”

“Oh, we won’t then,” Darya Alexandrovna hastened to say, noticing the
expression of suffering on Anna’s face. “All I see is that you take too
gloomy a view of things.”

“I? Not at all! I’m always bright and happy. You see, _je fais des
passions._ Veslovsky....”

“Yes, to tell the truth, I don’t like Veslovsky’s tone,” said Darya
Alexandrovna, anxious to change the subject.

“Oh, that’s nonsense! It amuses Alexey, and that’s all; but he’s a boy,
and quite under my control. You know, I turn him as I please. It’s just
as it might be with your Grisha.... Dolly!”—she suddenly changed the
subject—“you say I take too gloomy a view of things. You can’t
understand. It’s too awful! I try not to take any view of it at all.”

“But I think you ought to. You ought to do all you can.”

“But what can I do? Nothing. You tell me to marry Alexey, and say I
don’t think about it. I don’t think about it!” she repeated, and a
flush rose into her face. She got up, straightening her chest, and
sighed heavily. With her light step she began pacing up and down the
room, stopping now and then. “I don’t think of it? Not a day, not an
hour passes that I don’t think of it, and blame myself for thinking of
it ... because thinking of that may drive me mad. Drive me mad!” she
repeated. “When I think of it, I can’t sleep without morphine. But
never mind. Let us talk quietly. They tell me, divorce. In the first
place, he won’t give me a divorce. He’s under the influence of Countess
Lidia Ivanovna now.”

Darya Alexandrovna, sitting erect on a chair, turned her head,
following Anna with a face of sympathetic suffering.

“You ought to make the attempt,” she said softly.

“Suppose I make the attempt. What does it mean?” she said, evidently
giving utterance to a thought, a thousand times thought over and
learned by heart. “It means that I, hating him, but still recognizing
that I have wronged him—and I consider him magnanimous—that I humiliate
myself to write to him.... Well, suppose I make the effort; I do it.
Either I receive a humiliating refusal or consent.... Well, I have
received his consent, say....” Anna was at that moment at the furthest
end of the room, and she stopped there, doing something to the curtain
at the window. “I receive his consent, but my ... my son? They won’t
give him up to me. He will grow up despising me, with his father, whom
I’ve abandoned. Do you see, I love ... equally, I think, but both more
than myself—two creatures, Seryozha and Alexey.”

She came out into the middle of the room and stood facing Dolly, with
her arms pressed tightly across her chest. In her white dressing gown
her figure seemed more than usually grand and broad. She bent her head,
and with shining, wet eyes looked from under her brows at Dolly, a thin
little pitiful figure in her patched dressing jacket and nightcap,
shaking all over with emotion.

“It is only those two creatures that I love, and one excludes the
other. I can’t have them together, and that’s the only thing I want.
And since I can’t have that, I don’t care about the rest. I don’t care
about anything, anything. And it will end one way or another, and so I
can’t, I don’t like to talk of it. So don’t blame me, don’t judge me
for anything. You can’t with your pure heart understand all that I’m
suffering.” She went up, sat down beside Dolly, and with a guilty look,
peeped into her face and took her hand.

“What are you thinking? What are you thinking about me? Don’t despise
me. I don’t deserve contempt. I’m simply unhappy. If anyone is unhappy,
I am,” she articulated, and turning away, she burst into tears.

Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna said her prayers and went to bed. She
had felt for Anna with all her heart while she was speaking to her, but
now she could not force herself to think of her. The memories of home
and of her children rose up in her imagination with a peculiar charm
quite new to her, with a sort of new brilliance. That world of her own
seemed to her now so sweet and precious that she would not on any
account spend an extra day outside it, and she made up her mind that
she would certainly go back next day.

Anna meantime went back to her boudoir, took a wine-glass and dropped
into it several drops of a medicine, of which the principal ingredient
was morphine. After drinking it off and sitting still a little while,
she went into her bedroom in a soothed and more cheerful frame of mind.

When she went into the bedroom, Vronsky looked intently at her. He was
looking for traces of the conversation which he knew that, staying so
long in Dolly’s room, she must have had with her. But in her expression
of restrained excitement, and of a sort of reserve, he could find
nothing but the beauty that always bewitched him afresh though he was
used to it, the consciousness of it, and the desire that it should
affect him. He did not want to ask her what they had been talking of,
but he hoped that she would tell him something of her own accord. But
she only said:

“I am so glad you like Dolly. You do, don’t you?”

“Oh, I’ve known her a long while, you know. She’s very good-hearted, I
suppose, _mais excessivement terre-à-terre._ Still, I’m very glad to
see her.”

He took Anna’s hand and looked inquiringly into her eyes.

Misinterpreting the look, she smiled to him. Next morning, in spite of
the protests of her hosts, Darya Alexandrovna prepared for her homeward
journey. Levin’s coachman, in his by no means new coat and shabby hat,
with his ill-matched horses and his coach with the patched mud-guards,
drove with gloomy determination into the covered gravel approach.

Darya Alexandrovna disliked taking leave of Princess Varvara and the
gentlemen of the party. After a day spent together, both she and her
hosts were distinctly aware that they did not get on together, and that
it was better for them not to meet. Only Anna was sad. She knew that
now, from Dolly’s departure, no one again would stir up within her soul
the feelings that had been roused by their conversation. It hurt her to
stir up these feelings, but yet she knew that that was the best part of
her soul, and that that part of her soul would quickly be smothered in
the life she was leading.

As she drove out into the open country, Darya Alexandrovna had a
delightful sense of relief, and she felt tempted to ask the two men how
they had liked being at Vronsky’s, when suddenly the coachman, Philip,
expressed himself unasked:

“Rolling in wealth they may be, but three pots of oats was all they
gave us. Everything cleared up till there wasn’t a grain left by
cockcrow. What are three pots? A mere mouthful! And oats now down to
forty-five kopecks. At our place, no fear, all comers may have as much
as they can eat.”

“The master’s a screw,” put in the counting-house clerk.

“Well, did you like their horses?” asked Dolly.

“The horses!—there’s no two opinions about them. And the food was good.
But it seemed to me sort of dreary there, Darya Alexandrovna. I don’t
know what you thought,” he said, turning his handsome, good-natured
face to her.

“I thought so too. Well, shall we get home by evening?”

“Eh, we must!”

On reaching home and finding everyone entirely satisfactory and
particularly charming, Darya Alexandrovna began with great liveliness
telling them how she had arrived, how warmly they had received her, of
the luxury and good taste in which the Vronskys lived, and of their
recreations, and she would not allow a word to be said against them.

“One has to know Anna and Vronsky—I have got to know him better now—to
see how nice they are, and how touching,” she said, speaking now with
perfect sincerity, and forgetting the vague feeling of dissatisfaction
and awkwardness she had experienced there.


Chapter 25

Vronsky and Anna spent the whole summer and part of the winter in the
country, living in just the same condition, and still taking no steps
to obtain a divorce. It was an understood thing between them that they
should not go away anywhere; but both felt, the longer they lived
alone, especially in the autumn, without guests in the house, that they
could not stand this existence, and that they would have to alter it.

Their life was apparently such that nothing better could be desired.
They had the fullest abundance of everything; they had a child, and
both had occupation. Anna devoted just as much care to her appearance
when they had no visitors, and she did a great deal of reading, both of
novels and of what serious literature was in fashion. She ordered all
the books that were praised in the foreign papers and reviews she
received, and read them with that concentrated attention which is only
given to what is read in seclusion. Moreover, every subject that was of
interest to Vronsky, she studied in books and special journals, so that
he often went straight to her with questions relating to agriculture or
architecture, sometimes even with questions relating to horse-breeding
or sport. He was amazed at her knowledge, her memory, and at first was
disposed to doubt it, to ask for confirmation of her facts; and she
would find what he asked for in some book, and show it to him.

The building of the hospital, too, interested her. She did not merely
assist, but planned and suggested a great deal herself. But her chief
thought was still of herself—how far she was dear to Vronsky, how far
she could make up to him for all he had given up. Vronsky appreciated
this desire not only to please, but to serve him, which had become the
sole aim of her existence, but at the same time he wearied of the
loving snares in which she tried to hold him fast. As time went on, and
he saw himself more and more often held fast in these snares, he had an
ever growing desire, not so much to escape from them, as to try whether
they hindered his freedom. Had it not been for this growing desire to
be free, not to have scenes every time he wanted to go to the town to a
meeting or a race, Vronsky would have been perfectly satisfied with his
life. The rôle he had taken up, the rôle of a wealthy landowner, one of
that class which ought to be the very heart of the Russian aristocracy,
was entirely to his taste; and now, after spending six months in that
character, he derived even greater satisfaction from it. And his
management of his estate, which occupied and absorbed him more and
more, was most successful. In spite of the immense sums cost him by the
hospital, by machinery, by cows ordered from Switzerland, and many
other things, he was convinced that he was not wasting, but increasing
his substance. In all matters affecting income, the sales of timber,
wheat, and wool, the letting of lands, Vronsky was hard as a rock, and
knew well how to keep up prices. In all operations on a large scale on
this and his other estates, he kept to the simplest methods involving
no risk, and in trifling details he was careful and exacting to an
extreme degree. In spite of all the cunning and ingenuity of the German
steward, who would try to tempt him into purchases by making his
original estimate always far larger than really required, and then
representing to Vronsky that he might get the thing cheaper, and so
make a profit, Vronsky did not give in. He listened to his steward,
cross-examined him, and only agreed to his suggestions when the
implement to be ordered or constructed was the very newest, not yet
known in Russia, and likely to excite wonder. Apart from such
exceptions, he resolved upon an increased outlay only where there was a
surplus, and in making such an outlay he went into the minutest
details, and insisted on getting the very best for his money; so that
by the method on which he managed his affairs, it was clear that he was
not wasting, but increasing his substance.

In October there were the provincial elections in the Kashinsky
province, where were the estates of Vronsky, Sviazhsky, Koznishev,
Oblonsky, and a small part of Levin’s land.

These elections were attracting public attention from several
circumstances connected with them, and also from the people taking part
in them. There had been a great deal of talk about them, and great
preparations were being made for them. Persons who never attended the
elections were coming from Moscow, from Petersburg, and from abroad to
attend these. Vronsky had long before promised Sviazhsky to go to them.
Before the elections Sviazhsky, who often visited Vozdvizhenskoe, drove
over to fetch Vronsky. On the day before there had been almost a
quarrel between Vronsky and Anna over this proposed expedition. It was
the very dullest autumn weather, which is so dreary in the country, and
so, preparing himself for a struggle, Vronsky, with a hard and cold
expression, informed Anna of his departure as he had never spoken to
her before. But, to his surprise, Anna accepted the information with
great composure, and merely asked when he would be back. He looked
intently at her, at a loss to explain this composure. She smiled at his
look. He knew that way she had of withdrawing into herself, and knew
that it only happened when she had determined upon something without
letting him know her plans. He was afraid of this; but he was so
anxious to avoid a scene that he kept up appearances, and half
sincerely believed in what he longed to believe in—her reasonableness.

“I hope you won’t be dull?”

“I hope not,” said Anna. “I got a box of books yesterday from
Gautier’s. No, I shan’t be dull.”

“She’s trying to take that tone, and so much the better,” he thought,
“or else it would be the same thing over and over again.”

And he set off for the elections without appealing to her for a candid
explanation. It was the first time since the beginning of their
intimacy that he had parted from her without a full explanation. From
one point of view this troubled him, but on the other side he felt that
it was better so. “At first there will be, as this time, something
undefined kept back, and then she will get used to it. In any case I
can give up anything for her, but not my masculine independence,” he
thought.


Chapter 26

In September Levin moved to Moscow for Kitty’s confinement. He had
spent a whole month in Moscow with nothing to do, when Sergey
Ivanovitch, who had property in the Kashinsky province, and took great
interest in the question of the approaching elections, made ready to
set off to the elections. He invited his brother, who had a vote in the
Seleznevsky district, to come with him. Levin had, moreover, to
transact in Kashin some extremely important business relating to the
wardship of land and to the receiving of certain redemption money for
his sister, who was abroad.

Levin still hesitated, but Kitty, who saw that he was bored in Moscow,
and urged him to go, on her own authority ordered him the proper
nobleman’s uniform, costing seven pounds. And that seven pounds paid
for the uniform was the chief cause that finally decided Levin to go.
He went to Kashin....

Levin had been six days in Kashin, visiting the assembly each day, and
busily engaged about his sister’s business, which still dragged on. The
district marshals of nobility were all occupied with the elections, and
it was impossible to get the simplest thing done that depended upon the
court of wardship. The other matter, the payment of the sums due, was
met too by difficulties. After long negotiations over the legal
details, the money was at last ready to be paid; but the notary, a most
obliging person, could not hand over the order, because it must have
the signature of the president, and the president, though he had not
given over his duties to a deputy, was at the elections. All these
worrying negotiations, this endless going from place to place, and
talking with pleasant and excellent people, who quite saw the
unpleasantness of the petitioner’s position, but were powerless to
assist him—all these efforts that yielded no result, led to a feeling
of misery in Levin akin to the mortifying helplessness one experiences
in dreams when one tries to use physical force. He felt this frequently
as he talked to his most good-natured solicitor. This solicitor did, it
seemed, everything possible, and strained every nerve to get him out of
his difficulties. “I tell you what you might try,” he said more than
once; “go to so-and-so and so-and-so,” and the solicitor drew up a
regular plan for getting round the fatal point that hindered
everything. But he would add immediately, “It’ll mean some delay,
anyway, but you might try it.” And Levin did try, and did go. Everyone
was kind and civil, but the point evaded seemed to crop up again in the
end, and again to bar the way. What was particularly trying, was that
Levin could not make out with whom he was struggling, to whose interest
it was that his business should not be done. That no one seemed to
know; the solicitor certainly did not know. If Levin could have
understood why, just as he saw why one can only approach the booking
office of a railway station in single file, it would not have been so
vexatious and tiresome to him. But with the hindrances that confronted
him in his business, no one could explain why they existed.

But Levin had changed a good deal since his marriage; he was patient,
and if he could not see why it was all arranged like this, he told
himself that he could not judge without knowing all about it, and that
most likely it must be so, and he tried not to fret.

In attending the elections, too, and taking part in them, he tried now
not to judge, not to fall foul of them, but to comprehend as fully as
he could the question which was so earnestly and ardently absorbing
honest and excellent men whom he respected. Since his marriage there
had been revealed to Levin so many new and serious aspects of life that
had previously, through his frivolous attitude to them, seemed of no
importance, that in the question of the elections too he assumed and
tried to find some serious significance.

Sergey Ivanovitch explained to him the meaning and object of the
proposed revolution at the elections. The marshal of the province in
whose hands the law had placed the control of so many important public
functions—the guardianship of wards (the very department which was
giving Levin so much trouble just now), the disposal of large sums
subscribed by the nobility of the province, the high schools, female,
male, and military, and popular instruction on the new model, and
finally, the district council—the marshal of the province, Snetkov, was
a nobleman of the old school,—dissipating an immense fortune, a
good-hearted man, honest after his own fashion, but utterly without any
comprehension of the needs of modern days. He always took, in every
question, the side of the nobility; he was positively antagonistic to
the spread of popular education, and he succeeded in giving a purely
party character to the district council which ought by rights to be of
such an immense importance. What was needed was to put in his place a
fresh, capable, perfectly modern man, of contemporary ideas, and to
frame their policy so as from the rights conferred upon the nobles, not
as the nobility, but as an element of the district council, to extract
all the powers of self-government that could possibly be derived from
them. In the wealthy Kashinsky province, which always took the lead of
other provinces in everything, there was now such a preponderance of
forces that this policy, once carried through properly there, might
serve as a model for other provinces for all Russia. And hence the
whole question was of the greatest importance. It was proposed to elect
as marshal in place of Snetkov either Sviazhsky, or, better still,
Nevyedovsky, a former university professor, a man of remarkable
intelligence and a great friend of Sergey Ivanovitch.

The meeting was opened by the governor, who made a speech to the
nobles, urging them to elect the public functionaries, not from regard
for persons, but for the service and welfare of their fatherland, and
hoping that the honorable nobility of the Kashinsky province would, as
at all former elections, hold their duty as sacred, and vindicate the
exalted confidence of the monarch.

When he had finished with his speech, the governor walked out of the
hall, and the noblemen noisily and eagerly—some even
enthusiastically—followed him and thronged round him while he put on
his fur coat and conversed amicably with the marshal of the province.
Levin, anxious to see into everything and not to miss anything, stood
there too in the crowd, and heard the governor say: “Please tell Marya
Ivanovna my wife is very sorry she couldn’t come to the Home.” And
thereupon the nobles in high good-humor sorted out their fur coats and
all drove off to the cathedral.

In the cathedral Levin, lifting his hand like the rest and repeating
the words of the archdeacon, swore with most terrible oaths to do all
the governor had hoped they would do. Church services always affected
Levin, and as he uttered the words “I kiss the cross,” and glanced
round at the crowd of young and old men repeating the same, he felt
touched.

On the second and third days there was business relating to the
finances of the nobility and the female high school, of no importance
whatever, as Sergey Ivanovitch explained, and Levin, busy seeing after
his own affairs, did not attend the meetings. On the fourth day the
auditing of the marshal’s accounts took place at the high table of the
marshal of the province. And then there occurred the first skirmish
between the new party and the old. The committee who had been deputed
to verify the accounts reported to the meeting that all was in order.
The marshal of the province got up, thanked the nobility for their
confidence, and shed tears. The nobles gave him a loud welcome, and
shook hands with him. But at that instant a nobleman of Sergey
Ivanovitch’s party said that he had heard that the committee had not
verified the accounts, considering such a verification an insult to the
marshal of the province. One of the members of the committee
incautiously admitted this. Then a small gentleman, very young-looking
but very malignant, began to say that it would probably be agreeable to
the marshal of the province to give an account of his expenditures of
the public moneys, and that the misplaced delicacy of the members of
the committee was depriving him of this moral satisfaction. Then the
members of the committee tried to withdraw their admission, and Sergey
Ivanovitch began to prove that they must logically admit either that
they had verified the accounts or that they had not, and he developed
this dilemma in detail. Sergey Ivanovitch was answered by the spokesman
of the opposite party. Then Sviazhsky spoke, and then the malignant
gentleman again. The discussion lasted a long time and ended in
nothing. Levin was surprised that they should dispute upon this subject
so long, especially as, when he asked Sergey Ivanovitch whether he
supposed that money had been misappropriated, Sergey Ivanovitch
answered:

“Oh, no! He’s an honest man. But those old-fashioned methods of
paternal family arrangements in the management of provincial affairs
must be broken down.”

On the fifth day came the elections of the district marshals. It was
rather a stormy day in several districts. In the Seleznevsky district
Sviazhsky was elected unanimously without a ballot, and he gave a
dinner that evening.


Chapter 27

The sixth day was fixed for the election of the marshal of the
province.

The rooms, large and small, were full of noblemen in all sorts of
uniforms. Many had come only for that day. Men who had not seen each
other for years, some from the Crimea, some from Petersburg, some from
abroad, met in the rooms of the Hall of Nobility. There was much
discussion around the governor’s table under the portrait of the Tsar.

The nobles, both in the larger and the smaller rooms, grouped
themselves in camps, and from their hostile and suspicious glances,
from the silence that fell upon them when outsiders approached a group,
and from the way that some, whispering together, retreated to the
farther corridor, it was evident that each side had secrets from the
other. In appearance the noblemen were sharply divided into two
classes: the old and the new. The old were for the most part either in
old uniforms of the nobility, buttoned up closely, with spurs and hats,
or in their own special naval, cavalry, infantry, or official uniforms.
The uniforms of the older men were embroidered in the old-fashioned way
with epaulets on their shoulders; they were unmistakably tight and
short in the waist, as though their wearers had grown out of them. The
younger men wore the uniform of the nobility with long waists and broad
shoulders, unbuttoned over white waistcoats, or uniforms with black
collars and with the embroidered badges of justices of the peace. To
the younger men belonged the court uniforms that here and there
brightened up the crowd.

But the division into young and old did not correspond with the
division of parties. Some of the young men, as Levin observed, belonged
to the old party; and some of the very oldest noblemen, on the
contrary, were whispering with Sviazhsky, and were evidently ardent
partisans of the new party.

Levin stood in the smaller room, where they were smoking and taking
light refreshments, close to his own friends, and listening to what
they were saying, he conscientiously exerted all his intelligence
trying to understand what was said. Sergey Ivanovitch was the center
round which the others grouped themselves. He was listening at that
moment to Sviazhsky and Hliustov, the marshal of another district, who
belonged to their party. Hliustov would not agree to go with his
district to ask Snetkov to stand, while Sviazhsky was persuading him to
do so, and Sergey Ivanovitch was approving of the plan. Levin could not
make out why the opposition was to ask the marshal to stand whom they
wanted to supersede.

Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just been drinking and taking some lunch,
came up to them in his uniform of a gentleman of the bedchamber, wiping
his lips with a perfumed handkerchief of bordered batiste.

“We are placing our forces,” he said, pulling out his whiskers, “Sergey
Ivanovitch!”

And listening to the conversation, he supported Sviazhsky’s contention.

“One district’s enough, and Sviazhsky’s obviously of the opposition,”
he said, words evidently intelligible to all except Levin.

“Why, Kostya, you here too! I suppose you’re converted, eh?” he added,
turning to Levin and drawing his arm through his. Levin would have been
glad indeed to be converted, but could not make out what the point was,
and retreating a few steps from the speakers, he explained to Stepan
Arkadyevitch his inability to understand why the marshal of the
province should be asked to stand.

_“O sancta simplicitas!”_ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and briefly and
clearly he explained it to Levin. If, as at previous elections, all the
districts asked the marshal of the province to stand, then he would be
elected without a ballot. That must not be. Now eight districts had
agreed to call upon him: if two refused to do so, Snetkov might decline
to stand at all; and then the old party might choose another of their
party, which would throw them completely out in their reckoning. But if
only one district, Sviazhsky’s, did not call upon him to stand, Snetkov
would let himself be balloted for. They were even, some of them, going
to vote for him, and purposely to let him get a good many votes, so
that the enemy might be thrown off the scent, and when a candidate of
the other side was put up, they too might give him some votes. Levin
understood to some extent, but not fully, and would have put a few more
questions, when suddenly everyone began talking and making a noise and
they moved towards the big room.

“What is it? eh? whom?” “No guarantee? whose? what?” “They won’t pass
him?” “No guarantee?” “They won’t let Flerov in?” “Eh, because of the
charge against him?” “Why, at this rate, they won’t admit anyone. It’s
a swindle!” “The law!” Levin heard exclamations on all sides, and he
moved into the big room together with the others, all hurrying
somewhere and afraid of missing something. Squeezed by the crowding
noblemen, he drew near the high table where the marshal of the
province, Sviazhsky, and the other leaders were hotly disputing about
something.


Chapter 28

Levin was standing rather far off. A nobleman breathing heavily and
hoarsely at his side, and another whose thick boots were creaking,
prevented him from hearing distinctly. He could only hear the soft
voice of the marshal faintly, then the shrill voice of the malignant
gentleman, and then the voice of Sviazhsky. They were disputing, as far
as he could make out, as to the interpretation to be put on the act and
the exact meaning of the words: “liable to be called up for trial.”

The crowd parted to make way for Sergey Ivanovitch approaching the
table. Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till the malignant gentleman had
finished speaking, said that he thought the best solution would be to
refer to the act itself, and asked the secretary to find the act. The
act said that in case of difference of opinion, there must be a ballot.

Sergey Ivanovitch read the act and began to explain its meaning, but at
that point a tall, stout, round-shouldered landowner, with dyed
whiskers, in a tight uniform that cut the back of his neck, interrupted
him. He went up to the table, and striking it with his finger ring, he
shouted loudly: “A ballot! Put it to the vote! No need for more
talking!” Then several voices began to talk all at once, and the tall
nobleman with the ring, getting more and more exasperated, shouted more
and more loudly. But it was impossible to make out what he said.

He was shouting for the very course Sergey Ivanovitch had proposed; but
it was evident that he hated him and all his party, and this feeling of
hatred spread through the whole party and roused in opposition to it
the same vindictiveness, though in a more seemly form, on the other
side. Shouts were raised, and for a moment all was confusion, so that
the marshal of the province had to call for order.

“A ballot! A ballot! Every nobleman sees it! We shed our blood for our
country!... The confidence of the monarch.... No checking the accounts
of the marshal; he’s not a cashier.... But that’s not the point....
Votes, please! Beastly!...” shouted furious and violent voices on all
sides. Looks and faces were even more violent and furious than their
words. They expressed the most implacable hatred. Levin did not in the
least understand what was the matter, and he marveled at the passion
with which it was disputed whether or not the decision about Flerov
should be put to the vote. He forgot, as Sergey Ivanovitch explained to
him afterwards, this syllogism: that it was necessary for the public
good to get rid of the marshal of the province; that to get rid of the
marshal it was necessary to have a majority of votes; that to get a
majority of votes it was necessary to secure Flerov’s right to vote;
that to secure the recognition of Flerov’s right to vote they must
decide on the interpretation to be put on the act.

“And one vote may decide the whole question, and one must be serious
and consecutive, if one wants to be of use in public life,” concluded
Sergey Ivanovitch. But Levin forgot all that, and it was painful to him
to see all these excellent persons, for whom he had a respect, in such
an unpleasant and vicious state of excitement. To escape from this
painful feeling he went away into the other room where there was nobody
except the waiters at the refreshment bar. Seeing the waiters busy over
washing up the crockery and setting in order their plates and
wine-glasses, seeing their calm and cheerful faces, Levin felt an
unexpected sense of relief as though he had come out of a stuffy room
into the fresh air. He began walking up and down, looking with pleasure
at the waiters. He particularly liked the way one gray-whiskered
waiter, who showed his scorn for the other younger ones and was jeered
at by them, was teaching them how to fold up napkins properly. Levin
was just about to enter into conversation with the old waiter, when the
secretary of the court of wardship, a little old man whose specialty it
was to know all the noblemen of the province by name and patronymic,
drew him away.

“Please come, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” he said, “your brother’s
looking for you. They are voting on the legal point.”

Levin walked into the room, received a white ball, and followed his
brother, Sergey Ivanovitch, to the table where Sviazhsky was standing
with a significant and ironical face, holding his beard in his fist and
sniffing at it. Sergey Ivanovitch put his hand into the box, put the
ball somewhere, and making room for Levin, stopped. Levin advanced, but
utterly forgetting what he was to do, and much embarrassed, he turned
to Sergey Ivanovitch with the question, “Where am I to put it?” He
asked this softly, at a moment when there was talking going on near, so
that he had hoped his question would not be overheard. But the persons
speaking paused, and his improper question was overheard. Sergey
Ivanovitch frowned.

“That is a matter for each man’s own decision,” he said severely.

Several people smiled. Levin crimsoned, hurriedly thrust his hand under
the cloth, and put the ball to the right as it was in his right hand.
Having put it in, he recollected that he ought to have thrust his left
hand too, and so he thrust it in though too late, and, still more
overcome with confusion, he beat a hasty retreat into the background.

“A hundred and twenty-six for admission! Ninety-eight against!” sang
out the voice of the secretary, who could not pronounce the letter _r_.
Then there was a laugh; a button and two nuts were found in the box.
The nobleman was allowed the right to vote, and the new party had
conquered.

But the old party did not consider themselves conquered. Levin heard
that they were asking Snetkov to stand, and he saw that a crowd of
noblemen was surrounding the marshal, who was saying something. Levin
went nearer. In reply Snetkov spoke of the trust the noblemen of the
province had placed in him, the affection they had shown him, which he
did not deserve, as his only merit had been his attachment to the
nobility, to whom he had devoted twelve years of service. Several times
he repeated the words: “I have served to the best of my powers with
truth and good faith, I value your goodness and thank you,” and
suddenly he stopped short from the tears that choked him, and went out
of the room. Whether these tears came from a sense of the injustice
being done him, from his love for the nobility, or from the strain of
the position he was placed in, feeling himself surrounded by enemies,
his emotion infected the assembly, the majority were touched, and Levin
felt a tenderness for Snetkov.

In the doorway the marshal of the province jostled against Levin.

“Beg pardon, excuse me, please,” he said as to a stranger, but
recognizing Levin, he smiled timidly. It seemed to Levin that he would
have liked to say something, but could not speak for emotion. His face
and his whole figure in his uniform with the crosses, and white
trousers striped with braid, as he moved hurriedly along, reminded
Levin of some hunted beast who sees that he is in evil case. This
expression in the marshal’s face was particularly touching to Levin,
because, only the day before, he had been at his house about his
trustee business and had seen him in all his grandeur, a kind-hearted,
fatherly man. The big house with the old family furniture; the rather
dirty, far from stylish, but respectful footmen, unmistakably old house
serfs who had stuck to their master; the stout, good-natured wife in a
cap with lace and a Turkish shawl, petting her pretty grandchild, her
daughter’s daughter; the young son, a sixth form high school boy,
coming home from school, and greeting his father, kissing his big hand;
the genuine, cordial words and gestures of the old man—all this had the
day before roused an instinctive feeling of respect and sympathy in
Levin. This old man was a touching and pathetic figure to Levin now,
and he longed to say something pleasant to him.

“So you’re sure to be our marshal again,” he said.

“It’s not likely,” said the marshal, looking round with a scared
expression. “I’m worn out, I’m old. If there are men younger and more
deserving than I, let them serve.”

And the marshal disappeared through a side door.

The most solemn moment was at hand. They were to proceed immediately to
the election. The leaders of both parties were reckoning white and
black on their fingers.

The discussion upon Flerov had given the new party not only Flerov’s
vote, but had also gained time for them, so that they could send to
fetch three noblemen who had been rendered unable to take part in the
elections by the wiles of the other party. Two noble gentlemen, who had
a weakness for strong drink, had been made drunk by the partisans of
Snetkov, and a third had been robbed of his uniform.

On learning this, the new party had made haste, during the dispute
about Flerov, to send some of their men in a sledge to clothe the
stripped gentleman, and to bring along one of the intoxicated to the
meeting.

“I’ve brought one, drenched him with water,” said the landowner, who
had gone on this errand, to Sviazhsky. “He’s all right? he’ll do.”

“Not too drunk, he won’t fall down?” said Sviazhsky, shaking his head.

“No, he’s first-rate. If only they don’t give him any more here....
I’ve told the waiter not to give him anything on any account.”


Chapter 29

The narrow room, in which they were smoking and taking refreshments,
was full of noblemen. The excitement grew more intense, and every face
betrayed some uneasiness. The excitement was specially keen for the
leaders of each party, who knew every detail, and had reckoned up every
vote. They were the generals organizing the approaching battle. The
rest, like the rank and file before an engagement, though they were
getting ready for the fight, sought for other distractions in the
interval. Some were lunching, standing at the bar, or sitting at the
table; others were walking up and down the long room, smoking
cigarettes, and talking with friends whom they had not seen for a long
while.

Levin did not care to eat, and he was not smoking; he did not want to
join his own friends, that is Sergey Ivanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch,
Sviazhsky and the rest, because Vronsky in his equerry’s uniform was
standing with them in eager conversation. Levin had seen him already at
the meeting on the previous day, and he had studiously avoided him, not
caring to greet him. He went to the window and sat down, scanning the
groups, and listening to what was being said around him. He felt
depressed, especially because everyone else was, as he saw, eager,
anxious, and interested, and he alone, with an old, toothless little
man with mumbling lips wearing a naval uniform, sitting beside him, had
no interest in it and nothing to do.

“He’s such a blackguard! I have told him so, but it makes no
difference. Only think of it! He couldn’t collect it in three years!”
he heard vigorously uttered by a round-shouldered, short, country
gentleman, who had pomaded hair hanging on his embroidered collar, and
new boots obviously put on for the occasion, with heels that tapped
energetically as he spoke. Casting a displeased glance at Levin, this
gentleman sharply turned his back.

“Yes, it’s a dirty business, there’s no denying,” a small gentleman
assented in a high voice.

Next, a whole crowd of country gentlemen, surrounding a stout general,
hurriedly came near Levin. These persons were unmistakably seeking a
place where they could talk without being overheard.

“How dare he say I had his breeches stolen! Pawned them for drink, I
expect. Damn the fellow, prince indeed! He’d better not say it, the
beast!”

“But excuse me! They take their stand on the act,” was being said in
another group; “the wife must be registered as noble.”

“Oh, damn your acts! I speak from my heart. We’re all gentlemen, aren’t
we? Above suspicion.”

“Shall we go on, your excellency, _fine champagne?_”

Another group was following a nobleman, who was shouting something in a
loud voice; it was one of the three intoxicated gentlemen.

“I always advised Marya Semyonovna to let for a fair rent, for she can
never save a profit,” he heard a pleasant voice say. The speaker was a
country gentleman with gray whiskers, wearing the regimental uniform of
an old general staff-officer. It was the very landowner Levin had met
at Sviazhsky’s. He knew him at once. The landowner too stared at Levin,
and they exchanged greetings.

“Very glad to see you! To be sure! I remember you very well. Last year
at our district marshal, Nikolay Ivanovitch’s.”

“Well, and how is your land doing?” asked Levin.

“Oh, still just the same, always at a loss,” the landowner answered
with a resigned smile, but with an expression of serenity and
conviction that so it must be. “And how do you come to be in our
province?” he asked. “Come to take part in our _coup d’état?_” he said,
confidently pronouncing the French words with a bad accent. “All
Russia’s here—gentlemen of the bedchamber, and everything short of the
ministry.” He pointed to the imposing figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch in
white trousers and his court uniform, walking by with a general.

“I ought to own that I don’t very well understand the drift of the
provincial elections,” said Levin.

The landowner looked at him.

“Why, what is there to understand? There’s no meaning in it at all.
It’s a decaying institution that goes on running only by the force of
inertia. Just look, the very uniforms tell you that it’s an assembly of
justices of the peace, permanent members of the court, and so on, but
not of noblemen.”

“Then why do you come?” asked Levin.

“From habit, nothing else. Then, too, one must keep up connections.
It’s a moral obligation of a sort. And then, to tell the truth, there’s
one’s own interests. My son-in-law wants to stand as a permanent
member; they’re not rich people, and he must be brought forward. These
gentlemen, now, what do they come for?” he said, pointing to the
malignant gentleman, who was talking at the high table.

“That’s the new generation of nobility.”

“New it may be, but nobility it isn’t. They’re proprietors of a sort,
but we’re the landowners. As noblemen, they’re cutting their own
throats.”

“But you say it’s an institution that’s served its time.”

“That it may be, but still it ought to be treated a little more
respectfully. Snetkov, now.... We may be of use, or we may not, but
we’re the growth of a thousand years. If we’re laying out a garden,
planning one before the house, you know, and there you’ve a tree that’s
stood for centuries in the very spot.... Old and gnarled it may be, and
yet you don’t cut down the old fellow to make room for the flowerbeds,
but lay out your beds so as to take advantage of the tree. You won’t
grow him again in a year,” he said cautiously, and he immediately
changed the conversation. “Well, and how is your land doing?”

“Oh, not very well. I make five per cent.”

“Yes, but you don’t reckon your own work. Aren’t you worth something
too? I’ll tell you my own case. Before I took to seeing after the land,
I had a salary of three hundred pounds from the service. Now I do more
work than I did in the service, and like you I get five per cent. on
the land, and thank God for that. But one’s work is thrown in for
nothing.”

“Then why do you do it, if it’s a clear loss?”

“Oh, well, one does it! What would you have? It’s habit, and one knows
it’s how it should be. And what’s more,” the landowner went on, leaning
his elbows on the window and chatting on, “my son, I must tell you, has
no taste for it. There’s no doubt he’ll be a scientific man. So
there’ll be no one to keep it up. And yet one does it. Here this year
I’ve planted an orchard.”

“Yes, yes,” said Levin, “that’s perfectly true. I always feel there’s
no real balance of gain in my work on the land, and yet one does it....
It’s a sort of duty one feels to the land.”

“But I tell you what,” the landowner pursued; “a neighbor of mine, a
merchant, was at my place. We walked about the fields and the garden.
‘No,’ said he, ‘Stepan Vassilievitch, everything’s well looked after,
but your garden’s neglected.’ But, as a fact, it’s well kept up. ‘To my
thinking, I’d cut down that lime-tree. Here you’ve thousands of limes,
and each would make two good bundles of bark. And nowadays that bark’s
worth something. I’d cut down the lot.’”

“And with what he made he’d increase his stock, or buy some land for a
trifle, and let it out in lots to the peasants,” Levin added, smiling.
He had evidently more than once come across those commercial
calculations. “And he’d make his fortune. But you and I must thank God
if we keep what we’ve got and leave it to our children.”

“You’re married, I’ve heard?” said the landowner.

“Yes,” Levin answered, with proud satisfaction. “Yes, it’s rather
strange,” he went on. “So we live without making anything, as though we
were ancient vestals set to keep in a fire.”

The landowner chuckled under his white mustaches.

“There are some among us, too, like our friend Nikolay Ivanovitch, or
Count Vronsky, that’s settled here lately, who try to carry on their
husbandry as though it were a factory; but so far it leads to nothing
but making away with capital on it.”

“But why is it we don’t do like the merchants? Why don’t we cut down
our parks for timber?” said Levin, returning to a thought that had
struck him.

“Why, as you said, to keep the fire in. Besides that’s not work for a
nobleman. And our work as noblemen isn’t done here at the elections,
but yonder, each in our corner. There’s a class instinct, too, of what
one ought and oughtn’t to do. There’s the peasants, too, I wonder at
them sometimes; any good peasant tries to take all the land he can.
However bad the land is, he’ll work it. Without a return too. At a
simple loss.”

“Just as we do,” said Levin. “Very, very glad to have met you,” he
added, seeing Sviazhsky approaching him.

“And here we’ve met for the first time since we met at your place,”
said the landowner to Sviazhsky, “and we’ve had a good talk too.”

“Well, have you been attacking the new order of things?” said Sviazhsky
with a smile.

“That we’re bound to do.”

“You’ve relieved your feelings?”


Chapter 30

Sviazhsky took Levin’s arm, and went with him to his own friends.

This time there was no avoiding Vronsky. He was standing with Stepan
Arkadyevitch and Sergey Ivanovitch, and looking straight at Levin as he
drew near.

“Delighted! I believe I’ve had the pleasure of meeting you ... at
Princess Shtcherbatskaya’s,” he said, giving Levin his hand.

“Yes, I quite remember our meeting,” said Levin, and blushing crimson,
he turned away immediately, and began talking to his brother.

With a slight smile Vronsky went on talking to Sviazhsky, obviously
without the slightest inclination to enter into conversation with
Levin. But Levin, as he talked to his brother, was continually looking
round at Vronsky, trying to think of something to say to him to gloss
over his rudeness.

“What are we waiting for now?” asked Levin, looking at Sviazhsky and
Vronsky.

“For Snetkov. He has to refuse or to consent to stand,” answered
Sviazhsky.

“Well, and what has he done, consented or not?”

“That’s the point, that he’s done neither,” said Vronsky.

“And if he refuses, who will stand then?” asked Levin, looking at
Vronsky.

“Whoever chooses to,” said Sviazhsky.

“Shall you?” asked Levin.

“Certainly not I,” said Sviazhsky, looking confused, and turning an
alarmed glance at the malignant gentleman, who was standing beside
Sergey Ivanovitch.

“Who then? Nevyedovsky?” said Levin, feeling he was putting his foot
into it.

But this was worse still. Nevyedovsky and Sviazhsky were the two
candidates.

“I certainly shall not, under any circumstances,” answered the
malignant gentleman.

This was Nevyedovsky himself. Sviazhsky introduced him to Levin.

“Well, you find it exciting too?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, winking at
Vronsky. “It’s something like a race. One might bet on it.”

“Yes, it is keenly exciting,” said Vronsky. “And once taking the thing
up, one’s eager to see it through. It’s a fight!” he said, scowling and
setting his powerful jaws.

“What a capable fellow Sviazhsky is! Sees it all so clearly.”

“Oh, yes!” Vronsky assented indifferently.

A silence followed, during which Vronsky—since he had to look at
something—looked at Levin, at his feet, at his uniform, then at his
face, and noticing his gloomy eyes fixed upon him, he said, in order to
say something:

“How is it that you, living constantly in the country, are not a
justice of the peace? You are not in the uniform of one.”

“It’s because I consider that the justice of the peace is a silly
institution,” Levin answered gloomily. He had been all the time looking
for an opportunity to enter into conversation with Vronsky, so as to
smooth over his rudeness at their first meeting.

“I don’t think so, quite the contrary,” Vronsky said, with quiet
surprise.

“It’s a plaything,” Levin cut him short. “We don’t want justices of the
peace. I’ve never had a single thing to do with them during eight
years. And what I have had was decided wrongly by them. The justice of
the peace is over thirty miles from me. For some matter of two roubles
I should have to send a lawyer, who costs me fifteen.”

And he related how a peasant had stolen some flour from the miller, and
when the miller told him of it, had lodged a complaint for slander. All
this was utterly uncalled for and stupid, and Levin felt it himself as
he said it.

“Oh, this is such an original fellow!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with
his most soothing, almond-oil smile. “But come along; I think they’re
voting....”

And they separated.

“I can’t understand,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, who had observed his
brother’s clumsiness, “I can’t understand how anyone can be so
absolutely devoid of political tact. That’s where we Russians are so
deficient. The marshal of the province is our opponent, and with him
you’re _ami cochon_, and you beg him to stand. Count Vronsky, now ...
I’m not making a friend of him; he’s asked me to dinner, and I’m not
going; but he’s one of our side—why make an enemy of him? Then you ask
Nevyedovsky if he’s going to stand. That’s not a thing to do.”

“Oh, I don’t understand it at all! And it’s all such nonsense,” Levin
answered gloomily.

“You say it’s all such nonsense, but as soon as you have anything to do
with it, you make a muddle.”

Levin did not answer, and they walked together into the big room.

The marshal of the province, though he was vaguely conscious in the air
of some trap being prepared for him, and though he had not been called
upon by all to stand, had still made up his mind to stand. All was
silence in the room. The secretary announced in a loud voice that the
captain of the guards, Mihail Stepanovitch Snetkov, would now be
balloted for as marshal of the province.

The district marshals walked carrying plates, on which were balls, from
their tables to the high table, and the election began.

“Put it in the right side,” whispered Stepan Arkadyevitch, as with his
brother Levin followed the marshal of his district to the table. But
Levin had forgotten by now the calculations that had been explained to
him, and was afraid Stepan Arkadyevitch might be mistaken in saying
“the right side.” Surely Snetkov was the enemy. As he went up, he held
the ball in his right hand, but thinking he was wrong, just at the box
he changed to the left hand, and undoubtedly put the ball to the left.
An adept in the business, standing at the box and seeing by the mere
action of the elbow where each put his ball, scowled with annoyance. It
was no good for him to use his insight.

Everything was still, and the counting of the balls was heard. Then a
single voice rose and proclaimed the numbers for and against. The
marshal had been voted for by a considerable majority. All was noise
and eager movement towards the doors. Snetkov came in, and the nobles
thronged round him, congratulating him.

“Well, now is it over?” Levin asked Sergey Ivanovitch.

“It’s only just beginning,” Sviazhsky said, replying for Sergey
Ivanovitch with a smile. “Some other candidate may receive more votes
than the marshal.”

Levin had quite forgotten about that. Now he could only remember that
there was some sort of trickery in it, but he was too bored to think
what it was exactly. He felt depressed, and longed to get out of the
crowd.

As no one was paying any attention to him, and no one apparently needed
him, he quietly slipped away into the little room where the
refreshments were, and again had a great sense of comfort when he saw
the waiters. The little old waiter pressed him to have something, and
Levin agreed. After eating a cutlet with beans and talking to the
waiters of their former masters, Levin, not wishing to go back to the
hall, where it was all so distasteful to him, proceeded to walk through
the galleries. The galleries were full of fashionably dressed ladies,
leaning over the balustrade and trying not to lose a single word of
what was being said below. With the ladies were sitting and standing
smart lawyers, high school teachers in spectacles, and officers.
Everywhere they were talking of the election, and of how worried the
marshal was, and how splendid the discussions had been. In one group
Levin heard his brother’s praises. One lady was telling a lawyer:

“How glad I am I heard Koznishev! It’s worth losing one’s dinner. He’s
exquisite! So clear and distinct all of it! There’s not one of you in
the law courts that speaks like that. The only one is Meidel, and he’s
not so eloquent by a long way.”

Finding a free place, Levin leaned over the balustrade and began
looking and listening.

All the noblemen were sitting railed off behind barriers according to
their districts. In the middle of the room stood a man in a uniform,
who shouted in a loud, high voice:

“As a candidate for the marshalship of the nobility of the province we
call upon staff-captain Yevgeney Ivanovitch Apuhtin!” A dead silence
followed, and then a weak old voice was heard: “Declined!”

“We call upon the privy councilor Pyotr Petrovitch Bol,” the voice
began again.

“Declined!” a high boyish voice replied.

Again it began, and again “Declined.” And so it went on for about an
hour. Levin, with his elbows on the balustrade, looked and listened. At
first he wondered and wanted to know what it meant; then feeling sure
that he could not make it out he began to be bored. Then recalling all
the excitement and vindictiveness he had seen on all the faces, he felt
sad; he made up his mind to go, and went downstairs. As he passed
through the entry to the galleries he met a dejected high school boy
walking up and down with tired-looking eyes. On the stairs he met a
couple—a lady running quickly on her high heels and the jaunty deputy
prosecutor.

“I told you you weren’t late,” the deputy prosecutor was saying at the
moment when Levin moved aside to let the lady pass.

Levin was on the stairs to the way out, and was just feeling in his
waistcoat pocket for the number of his overcoat, when the secretary
overtook him.

“This way, please, Konstantin Dmitrievitch; they are voting.”

The candidate who was being voted on was Nevyedovsky, who had so
stoutly denied all idea of standing. Levin went up to the door of the
room; it was locked. The secretary knocked, the door opened, and Levin
was met by two red-faced gentlemen, who darted out.

“I can’t stand any more of it,” said one red-faced gentleman.

After them the face of the marshal of the province was poked out. His
face was dreadful-looking from exhaustion and dismay.

“I told you not to let anyone out!” he cried to the doorkeeper.

“I let someone in, your excellency!”

“Mercy on us!” and with a heavy sigh the marshal of the province walked
with downcast head to the high table in the middle of the room, his
legs staggering in his white trousers.

Nevyedovsky had scored a higher majority, as they had planned, and he
was the new marshal of the province. Many people were amused, many were
pleased and happy, many were in ecstasies, many were disgusted and
unhappy. The former marshal of the province was in a state of despair,
which he could not conceal. When Nevyedovsky went out of the room, the
crowd thronged round him and followed him enthusiastically, just as
they had followed the governor who had opened the meetings, and just as
they had followed Snetkov when he was elected.


Chapter 31

The newly elected marshal and many of the successful party dined that
day with Vronsky.

Vronsky had come to the elections partly because he was bored in the
country and wanted to show Anna his right to independence, and also to
repay Sviazhsky by his support at the election for all the trouble he
had taken for Vronsky at the district council election, but chiefly in
order strictly to perform all those duties of a nobleman and landowner
which he had taken upon himself. But he had not in the least expected
that the election would so interest him, so keenly excite him, and that
he would be so good at this kind of thing. He was quite a new man in
the circle of the nobility of the province, but his success was
unmistakable, and he was not wrong in supposing that he had already
obtained a certain influence. This influence was due to his wealth and
reputation, the capital house in the town lent him by his old friend
Shirkov, who had a post in the department of finances and was director
of a flourishing bank in Kashin; the excellent cook Vronsky had brought
from the country, and his friendship with the governor, who was a
schoolfellow of Vronsky’s—a schoolfellow he had patronized and
protected indeed. But what contributed more than all to his success was
his direct, equable manner with everyone, which very quickly made the
majority of the noblemen reverse the current opinion of his supposed
haughtiness. He was himself conscious that, except that whimsical
gentleman married to Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, who had _à propos de
bottes_ poured out a stream of irrelevant absurdities with such
spiteful fury, every nobleman with whom he had made acquaintance had
become his adherent. He saw clearly, and other people recognized it,
too, that he had done a great deal to secure the success of
Nevyedovsky. And now at his own table, celebrating Nevyedovsky’s
election, he was experiencing an agreeable sense of triumph over the
success of his candidate. The election itself had so fascinated him
that, if he could succeed in getting married during the next three
years, he began to think of standing himself—much as after winning a
race ridden by a jockey, he had longed to ride a race himself.

Today he was celebrating the success of his jockey. Vronsky sat at the
head of the table, on his right hand sat the young governor, a general
of high rank. To all the rest he was the chief man in the province, who
had solemnly opened the elections with his speech, and aroused a
feeling of respect and even of awe in many people, as Vronsky saw; to
Vronsky he was little Katka Maslov—that had been his nickname in the
Pages’ Corps—whom he felt to be shy and tried to _mettre à son aise_.
On the left hand sat Nevyedovsky with his youthful, stubborn, and
malignant face. With him Vronsky was simple and deferential.

Sviazhsky took his failure very light-heartedly. It was indeed no
failure in his eyes, as he said himself, turning, glass in hand, to
Nevyedovsky; they could not have found a better representative of the
new movement, which the nobility ought to follow. And so every honest
person, as he said, was on the side of today’s success and was
rejoicing over it.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was glad, too, that he was having a good time, and
that everyone was pleased. The episode of the elections served as a
good occasion for a capital dinner. Sviazhsky comically imitated the
tearful discourse of the marshal, and observed, addressing Nevyedovsky,
that his excellency would have to select another more complicated
method of auditing the accounts than tears. Another nobleman jocosely
described how footmen in stockings had been ordered for the marshal’s
ball, and how now they would have to be sent back unless the new
marshal would give a ball with footmen in stockings.

Continually during dinner they said of Nevyedovsky: “our marshal,” and
“your excellency.”

This was said with the same pleasure with which a bride is called
“Madame” and her husband’s name. Nevyedovsky affected to be not merely
indifferent but scornful of this appellation, but it was obvious that
he was highly delighted, and had to keep a curb on himself not to
betray the triumph which was unsuitable to their new liberal tone.

After dinner several telegrams were sent to people interested in the
result of the election. And Stepan Arkadyevitch, who was in high good
humor, sent Darya Alexandrovna a telegram: “Nevyedovsky elected by
twenty votes. Congratulations. Tell people.” He dictated it aloud,
saying: “We must let them share our rejoicing.” Darya Alexandrovna,
getting the message, simply sighed over the rouble wasted on it, and
understood that it was an after-dinner affair. She knew Stiva had a
weakness after dining for _faire jouer le télégraphe._



Everything, together with the excellent dinner and the wine, not from
Russian merchants, but imported direct from abroad, was extremely
dignified, simple, and enjoyable. The party—some twenty—had been
selected by Sviazhsky from among the more active new liberals, all of
the same way of thinking, who were at the same time clever and well
bred. They drank, also half in jest, to the health of the new marshal
of the province, of the governor, of the bank director, and of “our
amiable host.”

Vronsky was satisfied. He had never expected to find so pleasant a tone
in the provinces.

Towards the end of dinner it was still more lively. The governor asked
Vronsky to come to a concert for the benefit of the Servians which his
wife, who was anxious to make his acquaintance, had been getting up.

“There’ll be a ball, and you’ll see the belle of the province. Worth
seeing, really.”

“Not in my line,” Vronsky answered. He liked that English phrase. But
he smiled, and promised to come.

Before they rose from the table, when all of them were smoking,
Vronsky’s valet went up to him with a letter on a tray.

“From Vozdvizhenskoe by special messenger,” he said with a significant
expression.

“Astonishing! how like he is to the deputy prosecutor Sventitsky,” said
one of the guests in French of the valet, while Vronsky, frowning, read
the letter.

The letter was from Anna. Before he read the letter, he knew its
contents. Expecting the elections to be over in five days, he had
promised to be back on Friday. Today was Saturday, and he knew that the
letter contained reproaches for not being back at the time fixed. The
letter he had sent the previous evening had probably not reached her
yet.

The letter was what he had expected, but the form of it was unexpected,
and particularly disagreeable to him. “Annie is very ill, the doctor
says it may be inflammation. I am losing my head all alone. Princess
Varvara is no help, but a hindrance. I expected you the day before
yesterday, and yesterday, and now I am sending to find out where you
are and what you are doing. I wanted to come myself, but thought better
of it, knowing you would dislike it. Send some answer, that I may know
what to do.”

The child ill, yet she had thought of coming herself. Their daughter
ill, and this hostile tone.

The innocent festivities over the election, and this gloomy, burdensome
love to which he had to return struck Vronsky by their contrast. But he
had to go, and by the first train that night he set off home.


Chapter 32

Before Vronsky’s departure for the elections, Anna had reflected that
the scenes constantly repeated between them each time he left home,
might only make him cold to her instead of attaching him to her, and
resolved to do all she could to control herself so as to bear the
parting with composure. But the cold, severe glance with which he had
looked at her when he came to tell her he was going had wounded her,
and before he had started her peace of mind was destroyed.

In solitude afterwards, thinking over that glance which had expressed
his right to freedom, she came, as she always did, to the same
point—the sense of her own humiliation. “He has the right to go away
when and where he chooses. Not simply to go away, but to leave me. He
has every right, and I have none. But knowing that, he ought not to do
it. What has he done, though?... He looked at me with a cold, severe
expression. Of course that is something indefinable, impalpable, but it
has never been so before, and that glance means a great deal,” she
thought. “That glance shows the beginning of indifference.”

And though she felt sure that a coldness was beginning, there was
nothing she could do, she could not in any way alter her relations to
him. Just as before, only by love and by charm could she keep him. And
so, just as before, only by occupation in the day, by morphine at
night, could she stifle the fearful thought of what would be if he
ceased to love her. It is true there was still one means; not to keep
him—for that she wanted nothing more than his love—but to be nearer to
him, to be in such a position that he would not leave her. That means
was divorce and marriage. And she began to long for that, and made up
her mind to agree to it the first time he or Stiva approached her on
the subject.

Absorbed in such thoughts, she passed five days without him, the five
days that he was to be at the elections.

Walks, conversation with Princess Varvara, visits to the hospital, and,
most of all, reading—reading of one book after another—filled up her
time. But on the sixth day, when the coachman came back without him,
she felt that now she was utterly incapable of stifling the thought of
him and of what he was doing there, just at that time her little girl
was taken ill. Anna began to look after her, but even that did not
distract her mind, especially as the illness was not serious. However
hard she tried, she could not love this little child, and to feign love
was beyond her powers. Towards the evening of that day, still alone,
Anna was in such a panic about him that she decided to start for the
town, but on second thoughts wrote him the contradictory letter that
Vronsky received, and without reading it through, sent it off by a
special messenger. The next morning she received his letter and
regretted her own. She dreaded a repetition of the severe look he had
flung at her at parting, especially when he knew that the baby was not
dangerously ill. But still she was glad she had written to him. At this
moment Anna was positively admitting to herself that she was a burden
to him, that he would relinquish his freedom regretfully to return to
her, and in spite of that she was glad he was coming. Let him weary of
her, but he would be here with her, so that she would see him, would
know of every action he took.

She was sitting in the drawing-room near a lamp, with a new volume of
Taine, and as she read, listening to the sound of the wind outside, and
every minute expecting the carriage to arrive. Several times she had
fancied she heard the sound of wheels, but she had been mistaken. At
last she heard not the sound of wheels, but the coachman’s shout and
the dull rumble in the covered entry. Even Princess Varvara, playing
patience, confirmed this, and Anna, flushing hotly, got up; but instead
of going down, as she had done twice before, she stood still. She
suddenly felt ashamed of her duplicity, but even more she dreaded how
he might meet her. All feeling of wounded pride had passed now; she was
only afraid of the expression of his displeasure. She remembered that
her child had been perfectly well again for the last two days. She felt
positively vexed with her for getting better from the very moment her
letter was sent off. Then she thought of him, that he was here, all of
him, with his hands, his eyes. She heard his voice. And forgetting
everything, she ran joyfully to meet him.

“Well, how is Annie?” he said timidly from below, looking up to Anna as
she ran down to him.

He was sitting on a chair, and a footman was pulling off his warm
over-boot.

“Oh, she is better.”

“And you?” he said, shaking himself.

She took his hand in both of hers, and drew it to her waist, never
taking her eyes off him.

“Well, I’m glad,” he said, coldly scanning her, her hair, her dress,
which he knew she had put on for him. All was charming, but how many
times it had charmed him! And the stern, stony expression that she so
dreaded settled upon his face.

“Well, I’m glad. And are you well?” he said, wiping his damp beard with
his handkerchief and kissing her hand.

“Never mind,” she thought, “only let him be here, and so long as he’s
here he cannot, he dare not, cease to love me.”

The evening was spent happily and gaily in the presence of Princess
Varvara, who complained to him that Anna had been taking morphine in
his absence.

“What am I to do? I couldn’t sleep.... My thoughts prevented me. When
he’s here I never take it—hardly ever.”

He told her about the election, and Anna knew how by adroit questions
to bring him to what gave him most pleasure—his own success. She told
him of everything that interested him at home; and all that she told
him was of the most cheerful description.

But late in the evening, when they were alone, Anna, seeing that she
had regained complete possession of him, wanted to erase the painful
impression of the glance he had given her for her letter. She said:

“Tell me frankly, you were vexed at getting my letter, and you didn’t
believe me?”

As soon as she had said it, she felt that however warm his feelings
were to her, he had not forgiven her for that.

“Yes,” he said, “the letter was so strange. First, Annie ill, and then
you thought of coming yourself.”

“It was all the truth.”

“Oh, I don’t doubt it.”

“Yes, you do doubt it. You are vexed, I see.”

“Not for one moment. I’m only vexed, that’s true, that you seem somehow
unwilling to admit that there are duties....”

“The duty of going to a concert....”

“But we won’t talk about it,” he said.

“Why not talk about it?” she said.

“I only meant to say that matters of real importance may turn up. Now,
for instance, I shall have to go to Moscow to arrange about the
house.... Oh, Anna, why are you so irritable? Don’t you know that I
can’t live without you?”

“If so,” said Anna, her voice suddenly changing, “it means that you are
sick of this life.... Yes, you will come for a day and go away, as men
do....”

“Anna, that’s cruel. I am ready to give up my whole life.”

But she did not hear him.

“If you go to Moscow, I will go too. I will not stay here. Either we
must separate or else live together.”

“Why, you know, that’s my one desire. But for that....”

“We must get a divorce. I will write to him. I see I cannot go on like
this.... But I will come with you to Moscow.”

“You talk as if you were threatening me. But I desire nothing so much
as never to be parted from you,” said Vronsky, smiling.

But as he said these words there gleamed in his eyes not merely a cold
look, but the vindictive look of a man persecuted and made cruel.

She saw the look and correctly divined its meaning.

“If so, it’s a calamity!” that glance told her. It was a moment’s
impression, but she never forgot it.

Anna wrote to her husband asking him about a divorce, and towards the
end of November, taking leave of Princess Varvara, who wanted to go to
Petersburg, she went with Vronsky to Moscow. Expecting every day an
answer from Alexey Alexandrovitch, and after that the divorce, they now
established themselves together like married people.




PART SEVEN

Chapter 1


The Levins had been three months in Moscow. The date had long passed on
which, according to the most trustworthy calculations of people learned
in such matters, Kitty should have been confined. But she was still
about, and there was nothing to show that her time was any nearer than
two months ago. The doctor, the monthly nurse, and Dolly and her
mother, and most of all Levin, who could not think of the approaching
event without terror, began to be impatient and uneasy. Kitty was the
only person who felt perfectly calm and happy.

She was distinctly conscious now of the birth of a new feeling of love
for the future child, for her to some extent actually existing already,
and she brooded blissfully over this feeling. He was not by now
altogether a part of herself, but sometimes lived his own life
independently of her. Often this separate being gave her pain, but at
the same time she wanted to laugh with a strange new joy.

All the people she loved were with her, and all were so good to her, so
attentively caring for her, so entirely pleasant was everything
presented to her, that if she had not known and felt that it must all
soon be over, she could not have wished for a better and pleasanter
life. The only thing that spoiled the charm of this manner of life was
that her husband was not here as she loved him to be, and as he was in
the country.

She liked his serene, friendly, and hospitable manner in the country.
In the town he seemed continually uneasy and on his guard, as though he
were afraid someone would be rude to him, and still more to her. At
home in the country, knowing himself distinctly to be in his right
place, he was never in haste to be off elsewhere. He was never
unoccupied. Here in town he was in a continual hurry, as though afraid
of missing something, and yet he had nothing to do. And she felt sorry
for him. To others, she knew, he did not appear an object of pity. On
the contrary, when Kitty looked at him in society, as one sometimes
looks at those one loves, trying to see him as if he were a stranger,
so as to catch the impression he must make on others, she saw with a
panic even of jealous fear that he was far indeed from being a pitiable
figure, that he was very attractive with his fine breeding, his rather
old-fashioned, reserved courtesy with women, his powerful figure, and
striking, as she thought, and expressive face. But she saw him not from
without, but from within; she saw that here he was not himself; that
was the only way she could define his condition to herself. Sometimes
she inwardly reproached him for his inability to live in the town;
sometimes she recognized that it was really hard for him to order his
life here so that he could be satisfied with it.

What had he to do, indeed? He did not care for cards; he did not go to
a club. Spending the time with jovial gentlemen of Oblonsky’s type—she
knew now what that meant ... it meant drinking and going somewhere
after drinking. She could not think without horror of where men went on
such occasions. Was he to go into society? But she knew he could only
find satisfaction in that if he took pleasure in the society of young
women, and that she could not wish for. Should he stay at home with
her, her mother and her sisters? But much as she liked and enjoyed
their conversations forever on the same subjects—“Aline-Nadine,” as the
old prince called the sisters’ talks—she knew it must bore him. What
was there left for him to do? To go on writing at his book he had
indeed attempted, and at first he used to go to the library and make
extracts and look up references for his book. But, as he told her, the
more he did nothing, the less time he had to do anything. And besides,
he complained that he had talked too much about his book here, and that
consequently all his ideas about it were muddled and had lost their
interest for him.

One advantage in this town life was that quarrels hardly ever happened
between them here in town. Whether it was that their conditions were
different, or that they had both become more careful and sensible in
that respect, they had no quarrels in Moscow from jealousy, which they
had so dreaded when they moved from the country.

One event, an event of great importance to both from that point of
view, did indeed happen—that was Kitty’s meeting with Vronsky.

The old Princess Marya Borissovna, Kitty’s godmother, who had always
been very fond of her, had insisted on seeing her. Kitty, though she
did not go into society at all on account of her condition, went with
her father to see the venerable old lady, and there met Vronsky.

The only thing Kitty could reproach herself for at this meeting was
that at the instant when she recognized in his civilian dress the
features once so familiar to her, her breath failed her, the blood
rushed to her heart, and a vivid blush—she felt it—overspread her face.
But this lasted only a few seconds. Before her father, who purposely
began talking in a loud voice to Vronsky, had finished, she was
perfectly ready to look at Vronsky, to speak to him, if necessary,
exactly as she spoke to Princess Marya Borissovna, and more than that,
to do so in such a way that everything to the faintest intonation and
smile would have been approved by her husband, whose unseen presence
she seemed to feel about her at that instant.

She said a few words to him, even smiled serenely at his joke about the
elections, which he called “our parliament.” (She had to smile to show
she saw the joke.) But she turned away immediately to Princess Marya
Borissovna, and did not once glance at him till he got up to go; then
she looked at him, but evidently only because it would be uncivil not
to look at a man when he is saying good-bye.

She was grateful to her father for saying nothing to her about their
meeting Vronsky, but she saw by his special warmth to her after the
visit during their usual walk that he was pleased with her. She was
pleased with herself. She had not expected she would have had the
power, while keeping somewhere in the bottom of her heart all the
memories of her old feeling for Vronsky, not only to seem but to be
perfectly indifferent and composed with him.

Levin flushed a great deal more than she when she told him she had met
Vronsky at Princess Marya Borissovna’s. It was very hard for her to
tell him this, but still harder to go on speaking of the details of the
meeting, as he did not question her, but simply gazed at her with a
frown.

“I am very sorry you weren’t there,” she said. “Not that you weren’t in
the room ... I couldn’t have been so natural in your presence ... I am
blushing now much more, much, much more,” she said, blushing till the
tears came into her eyes. “But that you couldn’t see through a crack.”

The truthful eyes told Levin that she was satisfied with herself, and
in spite of her blushing he was quickly reassured and began questioning
her, which was all she wanted. When he had heard everything, even to
the detail that for the first second she could not help flushing, but
that afterwards she was just as direct and as much at her ease as with
any chance acquaintance, Levin was quite happy again and said he was
glad of it, and would not now behave as stupidly as he had done at the
election, but would try the first time he met Vronsky to be as friendly
as possible.

“It’s so wretched to feel that there’s a man almost an enemy whom it’s
painful to meet,” said Levin. “I’m very, very glad.”


Chapter 2

“Go, please, go then and call on the Bols,” Kitty said to her husband,
when he came in to see her at eleven o’clock before going out. “I know
you are dining at the club; papa put down your name. But what are you
going to do in the morning?”

“I am only going to Katavasov,” answered Levin.

“Why so early?”

“He promised to introduce me to Metrov. I wanted to talk to him about
my work. He’s a distinguished scientific man from Petersburg,” said
Levin.

“Yes; wasn’t it his article you were praising so? Well, and after
that?” said Kitty.

“I shall go to the court, perhaps, about my sister’s business.”

“And the concert?” she queried.

“I shan’t go there all alone.”

“No? do go; there are going to be some new things.... That interested
you so. I should certainly go.”

“Well, anyway, I shall come home before dinner,” he said, looking at
his watch.

“Put on your frock coat, so that you can go straight to call on
Countess Bola.”

“But is it absolutely necessary?”

“Oh, absolutely! He has been to see us. Come, what is it? You go in,
sit down, talk for five minutes of the weather, get up and go away.”

“Oh, you wouldn’t believe it! I’ve got so out of the way of all this
that it makes me feel positively ashamed. It’s such a horrible thing to
do! A complete outsider walks in, sits down, stays on with nothing to
do, wastes their time and worries himself, and walks away!”

Kitty laughed.

“Why, I suppose you used to pay calls before you were married, didn’t
you?”

“Yes, I did, but I always felt ashamed, and now I’m so out of the way
of it that, by Jove! I’d sooner go two days running without my dinner
than pay this call! One’s so ashamed! I feel all the while that they’re
annoyed, that they’re saying, ‘What has he come for?’”

“No, they won’t. I’ll answer for that,” said Kitty, looking into his
face with a laugh. She took his hand. “Well, good-bye.... Do go,
please.”

He was just going out after kissing his wife’s hand, when she stopped
him.

“Kostya, do you know I’ve only fifty roubles left?”

“Oh, all right, I’ll go to the bank and get some. How much?” he said,
with the expression of dissatisfaction she knew so well.

“No, wait a minute.” She held his hand. “Let’s talk about it, it
worries me. I seem to spend nothing unnecessary, but money seems to fly
away simply. We don’t manage well, somehow.”

“Oh, it’s all right,” he said with a little cough, looking at her from
under his brows.

That cough she knew well. It was a sign of intense dissatisfaction, not
with her, but with himself. He certainly was displeased not at so much
money being spent, but at being reminded of what he, knowing something
was unsatisfactory, wanted to forget.

“I have told Sokolov to sell the wheat, and to borrow an advance on the
mill. We shall have money enough in any case.”

“Yes, but I’m afraid that altogether....”

“Oh, it’s all right, all right,” he repeated. “Well, good-bye,
darling.”

“No, I’m really sorry sometimes that I listened to mamma. How nice it
would have been in the country! As it is, I’m worrying you all, and
we’re wasting our money.”

“Not at all, not at all. Not once since I’ve been married have I said
that things could have been better than they are....”

“Truly?” she said, looking into his eyes.

He had said it without thinking, simply to console her. But when he
glanced at her and saw those sweet truthful eyes fastened questioningly
on him, he repeated it with his whole heart. “I was positively
forgetting her,” he thought. And he remembered what was before them, so
soon to come.

“Will it be soon? How do you feel?” he whispered, taking her two hands.

“I have so often thought so, that now I don’t think about it or know
anything about it.”

“And you’re not frightened?”

She smiled contemptuously.

“Not the least little bit,” she said.

“Well, if anything happens, I shall be at Katavasov’s.”

“No, nothing will happen, and don’t think about it. I’m going for a
walk on the boulevard with papa. We’re going to see Dolly. I shall
expect you before dinner. Oh, yes! Do you know that Dolly’s position is
becoming utterly impossible? She’s in debt all round; she hasn’t a
penny. We were talking yesterday with mamma and Arseny” (this was her
sister’s husband Lvov), “and we determined to send you with him to talk
to Stiva. It’s really unbearable. One can’t speak to papa about it....
But if you and he....”

“Why, what can we do?” said Levin.

“You’ll be at Arseny’s, anyway; talk to him, he will tell what we
decided.”

“Oh, I agree to everything Arseny thinks beforehand. I’ll go and see
him. By the way, if I do go to the concert, I’ll go with Natalia. Well,
good-bye.”

On the steps Levin was stopped by his old servant Kouzma, who had been
with him before his marriage, and now looked after their household in
town.

“Beauty” (that was the left shaft-horse brought up from the country)
“has been badly shod and is quite lame,” he said. “What does your honor
wish to be done?”

During the first part of their stay in Moscow, Levin had used his own
horses brought up from the country. He had tried to arrange this part
of their expenses in the best and cheapest way possible; but it
appeared that their own horses came dearer than hired horses, and they
still hired too.

“Send for the veterinary, there may be a bruise.”

“And for Katerina Alexandrovna?” asked Kouzma.

Levin was not by now struck as he had been at first by the fact that to
get from one end of Moscow to the other he had to have two powerful
horses put into a heavy carriage, to take the carriage three miles
through the snowy slush and to keep it standing there four hours,
paying five roubles every time.

Now it seemed quite natural.

“Hire a pair for our carriage from the jobmaster,” said he.

“Yes, sir.”

And so, simply and easily, thanks to the facilities of town life, Levin
settled a question which, in the country, would have called for so much
personal trouble and exertion, and going out onto the steps, he called
a sledge, sat down, and drove to Nikitsky. On the way he thought no
more of money, but mused on the introduction that awaited him to the
Petersburg savant, a writer on sociology, and what he would say to him
about his book.

Only during the first days of his stay in Moscow Levin had been struck
by the expenditure, strange to one living in the country, unproductive
but inevitable, that was expected of him on every side. But by now he
had grown used to it. That had happened to him in this matter which is
said to happen to drunkards—the first glass sticks in the throat, the
second flies down like a hawk, but after the third they’re like tiny
little birds. When Levin had changed his first hundred-rouble note to
pay for liveries for his footmen and hall-porter he could not help
reflecting that these liveries were of no use to anyone—but they were
indubitably necessary, to judge by the amazement of the princess and
Kitty when he suggested that they might do without liveries,—that these
liveries would cost the wages of two laborers for the summer, that is,
would pay for about three hundred working days from Easter to Ash
Wednesday, and each a day of hard work from early morning to late
evening—and that hundred-rouble note did stick in his throat. But the
next note, changed to pay for providing a dinner for their relations,
that cost twenty-eight roubles, though it did excite in Levin the
reflection that twenty-eight roubles meant nine measures of oats, which
men would with groans and sweat have reaped and bound and thrashed and
winnowed and sifted and sown,—this next one he parted with more easily.
And now the notes he changed no longer aroused such reflections, and
they flew off like little birds. Whether the labor devoted to obtaining
the money corresponded to the pleasure given by what was bought with
it, was a consideration he had long ago dismissed. His business
calculation that there was a certain price below which he could not
sell certain grain was forgotten too. The rye, for the price of which
he had so long held out, had been sold for fifty kopecks a measure
cheaper than it had been fetching a month ago. Even the consideration
that with such an expenditure he could not go on living for a year
without debt, that even had no force. Only one thing was essential: to
have money in the bank, without inquiring where it came from, so as to
know that one had the wherewithal to buy meat for tomorrow. And this
condition had hitherto been fulfilled; he had always had the money in
the bank. But now the money in the bank had gone, and he could not
quite tell where to get the next installment. And this it was which, at
the moment when Kitty had mentioned money, had disturbed him; but he
had no time to think about it. He drove off, thinking of Katavasov and
the meeting with Metrov that was before him.


Chapter 3

Levin had on this visit to town seen a great deal of his old friend at
the university, Professor Katavasov, whom he had not seen since his
marriage. He liked in Katavasov the clearness and simplicity of his
conception of life. Levin thought that the clearness of Katavasov’s
conception of life was due to the poverty of his nature; Katavasov
thought that the disconnectedness of Levin’s ideas was due to his lack
of intellectual discipline; but Levin enjoyed Katavasov’s clearness,
and Katavasov enjoyed the abundance of Levin’s untrained ideas, and
they liked to meet and to discuss.

Levin had read Katavasov some parts of his book, and he had liked them.
On the previous day Katavasov had met Levin at a public lecture and
told him that the celebrated Metrov, whose article Levin had so much
liked, was in Moscow, that he had been much interested by what
Katavasov had told him about Levin’s work, and that he was coming to
see him tomorrow at eleven, and would be very glad to make Levin’s
acquaintance.

“You’re positively a reformed character, I’m glad to see,” said
Katavasov, meeting Levin in the little drawing-room. “I heard the bell
and thought: Impossible that it can be he at the exact time!... Well,
what do you say to the Montenegrins now? They’re a race of warriors.”

“Why, what’s happened?” asked Levin.

Katavasov in a few words told him the last piece of news from the war,
and going into his study, introduced Levin to a short, thick-set man of
pleasant appearance. This was Metrov. The conversation touched for a
brief space on politics and on how recent events were looked at in the
higher spheres in Petersburg. Metrov repeated a saying that had reached
him through a most trustworthy source, reported as having been uttered
on this subject by the Tsar and one of the ministers. Katavasov had
heard also on excellent authority that the Tsar had said something
quite different. Levin tried to imagine circumstances in which both
sayings might have been uttered, and the conversation on that topic
dropped.

“Yes, here he’s written almost a book on the natural conditions of the
laborer in relation to the land,” said Katavasov; “I’m not a
specialist, but I, as a natural science man, was pleased at his not
taking mankind as something outside biological laws; but, on the
contrary, seeing his dependence on his surroundings, and in that
dependence seeking the laws of his development.”

“That’s very interesting,” said Metrov.

“What I began precisely was to write a book on agriculture; but
studying the chief instrument of agriculture, the laborer,” said Levin,
reddening, “I could not help coming to quite unexpected results.”

And Levin began carefully, as it were, feeling his ground, to expound
his views. He knew Metrov had written an article against the generally
accepted theory of political economy, but to what extent he could
reckon on his sympathy with his own new views he did not know and could
not guess from the clever and serene face of the learned man.

“But in what do you see the special characteristics of the Russian
laborer?” said Metrov; “in his biological characteristics, so to speak,
or in the condition in which he is placed?”

Levin saw that there was an idea underlying this question with which he
did not agree. But he went on explaining his own idea that the Russian
laborer has a quite special view of the land, different from that of
other people; and to support this proposition he made haste to add that
in his opinion this attitude of the Russian peasant was due to the
consciousness of his vocation to people vast unoccupied expanses in the
East.

“One may easily be led into error in basing any conclusion on the
general vocation of a people,” said Metrov, interrupting Levin. “The
condition of the laborer will always depend on his relation to the land
and to capital.”

And without letting Levin finish explaining his idea, Metrov began
expounding to him the special point of his own theory.

In what the point of his theory lay, Levin did not understand, because
he did not take the trouble to understand. He saw that Metrov, like
other people, in spite of his own article, in which he had attacked the
current theory of political economy, looked at the position of the
Russian peasant simply from the point of view of capital, wages, and
rent. He would indeed have been obliged to admit that in the
eastern—much the larger—part of Russia rent was as yet nil, that for
nine-tenths of the eighty millions of the Russian peasants wages took
the form simply of food provided for themselves, and that capital does
not so far exist except in the form of the most primitive tools. Yet it
was only from that point of view that he considered every laborer,
though in many points he differed from the economists and had his own
theory of the wage-fund, which he expounded to Levin.

Levin listened reluctantly, and at first made objections. He would have
liked to interrupt Metrov, to explain his own thought, which in his
opinion would have rendered further exposition of Metrov’s theories
superfluous. But later on, feeling convinced that they looked at the
matter so differently, that they could never understand one another, he
did not even oppose his statements, but simply listened. Although what
Metrov was saying was by now utterly devoid of interest for him, he yet
experienced a certain satisfaction in listening to him. It flattered
his vanity that such a learned man should explain his ideas to him so
eagerly, with such intensity and confidence in Levin’s understanding of
the subject, sometimes with a mere hint referring him to a whole aspect
of the subject. He put this down to his own credit, unaware that
Metrov, who had already discussed his theory over and over again with
all his intimate friends, talked of it with special eagerness to every
new person, and in general was eager to talk to anyone of any subject
that interested him, even if still obscure to himself.

“We are late though,” said Katavasov, looking at his watch directly
Metrov had finished his discourse.

“Yes, there’s a meeting of the Society of Amateurs today in
commemoration of the jubilee of Svintitch,” said Katavasov in answer to
Levin’s inquiry. “Pyotr Ivanovitch and I were going. I’ve promised to
deliver an address on his labors in zoology. Come along with us, it’s
very interesting.”

“Yes, and indeed it’s time to start,” said Metrov. “Come with us, and
from there, if you care to, come to my place. I should very much like
to hear your work.”

“Oh, no! It’s no good yet, it’s unfinished. But I shall be very glad to
go to the meeting.”

“I say, friends, have you heard? He has handed in the separate report,”
Katavasov called from the other room, where he was putting on his frock
coat.

And a conversation sprang up upon the university question, which was a
very important event that winter in Moscow. Three old professors in the
council had not accepted the opinion of the younger professors. The
young ones had registered a separate resolution. This, in the judgment
of some people, was monstrous, in the judgment of others it was the
simplest and most just thing to do, and the professors were split up
into two parties.

One party, to which Katavasov belonged, saw in the opposite party a
scoundrelly betrayal and treachery, while the opposite party saw in
them childishness and lack of respect for the authorities. Levin,
though he did not belong to the university, had several times already
during his stay in Moscow heard and talked about this matter, and had
his own opinion on the subject. He took part in the conversation that
was continued in the street, as they all three walked to the buildings
of the old university.

The meeting had already begun. Round the cloth-covered table, at which
Katavasov and Metrov seated themselves, there were some half-dozen
persons, and one of these was bending close over a manuscript, reading
something aloud. Levin sat down in one of the empty chairs that were
standing round the table, and in a whisper asked a student sitting near
what was being read. The student, eyeing Levin with displeasure, said:

“Biography.”

Though Levin was not interested in the biography, he could not help
listening, and learned some new and interesting facts about the life of
the distinguished man of science.

When the reader had finished, the chairman thanked him and read some
verses of the poet Ment sent him on the jubilee, and said a few words
by way of thanks to the poet. Then Katavasov in his loud, ringing voice
read his address on the scientific labors of the man whose jubilee was
being kept.

When Katavasov had finished, Levin looked at his watch, saw it was past
one, and thought that there would not be time before the concert to
read Metrov his book, and indeed, he did not now care to do so. During
the reading he had thought over their conversation. He saw distinctly
now that though Metrov’s ideas might perhaps have value, his own ideas
had a value too, and their ideas could only be made clear and lead to
something if each worked separately in his chosen path, and that
nothing would be gained by putting their ideas together. And having
made up his mind to refuse Metrov’s invitation, Levin went up to him at
the end of the meeting. Metrov introduced Levin to the chairman, with
whom he was talking of the political news. Metrov told the chairman
what he had already told Levin, and Levin made the same remarks on his
news that he had already made that morning, but for the sake of variety
he expressed also a new opinion which had only just struck him. After
that the conversation turned again on the university question. As Levin
had already heard it all, he made haste to tell Metrov that he was
sorry he could not take advantage of his invitation, took leave, and
drove to Lvov’s.


Chapter 4

Lvov, the husband of Natalia, Kitty’s sister, had spent all his life in
foreign capitals, where he had been educated, and had been in the
diplomatic service.

During the previous year he had left the diplomatic service, not owing
to any “unpleasantness” (he never had any “unpleasantness” with
anyone), and was transferred to the department of the court of the
palace in Moscow, in order to give his two boys the best education
possible.

In spite of the striking contrast in their habits and views and the
fact that Lvov was older than Levin, they had seen a great deal of one
another that winter, and had taken a great liking to each other.

Lvov was at home, and Levin went in to him unannounced.

Lvov, in a house coat with a belt and in chamois leather shoes, was
sitting in an armchair, and with a pince-nez with blue glasses he was
reading a book that stood on a reading desk, while in his beautiful
hand he held a half-burned cigarette daintily away from him.

His handsome, delicate, and still youthful-looking face, to which his
curly, glistening silvery hair gave a still more aristocratic air,
lighted up with a smile when he saw Levin.

“Capital! I was meaning to send to you. How’s Kitty? Sit here, it’s
more comfortable.” He got up and pushed up a rocking chair. “Have you
read the last circular in the _Journal de St. Pétersbourg?_ I think
it’s excellent,” he said, with a slight French accent.

Levin told him what he had heard from Katavasov was being said in
Petersburg, and after talking a little about politics, he told him of
his interview with Metrov, and the learned society’s meeting. To Lvov
it was very interesting.

“That’s what I envy you, that you are able to mix in these interesting
scientific circles,” he said. And as he talked, he passed as usual into
French, which was easier to him. “It’s true I haven’t the time for it.
My official work and the children leave me no time; and then I’m not
ashamed to own that my education has been too defective.”

“That I don’t believe,” said Levin with a smile, feeling, as he always
did, touched at Lvov’s low opinion of himself, which was not in the
least put on from a desire to seem or to be modest, but was absolutely
sincere.

“Oh, yes, indeed! I feel now how badly educated I am. To educate my
children I positively have to look up a great deal, and in fact simply
to study myself. For it’s not enough to have teachers, there must be
someone to look after them, just as on your land you want laborers and
an overseer. See what I’m reading”—he pointed to Buslaev’s _Grammar_ on
the desk—“it’s expected of Misha, and it’s so difficult.... Come,
explain to me.... Here he says....”

Levin tried to explain to him that it couldn’t be understood, but that
it had to be taught; but Lvov would not agree with him.

“Oh, you’re laughing at it!”

“On the contrary, you can’t imagine how, when I look at you, I’m always
learning the task that lies before me, that is the education of one’s
children.”

“Well, there’s nothing for you to learn,” said Lvov.

“All I know,” said Levin, “is that I have never seen better brought-up
children than yours, and I wouldn’t wish for children better than
yours.”

Lvov visibly tried to restrain the expression of his delight, but he
was positively radiant with smiles.

“If only they’re better than I! That’s all I desire. You don’t know yet
all the work,” he said, “with boys who’ve been left like mine to run
wild abroad.”

“You’ll catch all that up. They’re such clever children. The great
thing is the education of character. That’s what I learn when I look at
your children.”

“You talk of the education of character. You can’t imagine how
difficult that is! You have hardly succeeded in combating one tendency
when others crop up, and the struggle begins again. If one had not a
support in religion—you remember we talked about that—no father could
bring children up relying on his own strength alone without that help.”

This subject, which always interested Levin, was cut short by the
entrance of the beauty Natalia Alexandrovna, dressed to go out.

“I didn’t know you were here,” she said, unmistakably feeling no
regret, but a positive pleasure, in interrupting this conversation on a
topic she had heard so much of that she was by now weary of it. “Well,
how is Kitty? I am dining with you today. I tell you what, Arseny,” she
turned to her husband, “you take the carriage.”

And the husband and wife began to discuss their arrangements for the
day. As the husband had to drive to meet someone on official business,
while the wife had to go to the concert and some public meeting of a
committee on the Eastern Question, there was a great deal to consider
and settle. Levin had to take part in their plans as one of themselves.
It was settled that Levin should go with Natalia to the concert and the
meeting, and that from there they should send the carriage to the
office for Arseny, and he should call for her and take her to Kitty’s;
or that, if he had not finished his work, he should send the carriage
back and Levin would go with her.

“He’s spoiling me,” Lvov said to his wife; “he assures me that our
children are splendid, when I know how much that’s bad there is in
them.”

“Arseny goes to extremes, I always say,” said his wife. “If you look
for perfection, you will never be satisfied. And it’s true, as papa
says,—that when we were brought up there was one extreme—we were kept
in the basement, while our parents lived in the best rooms; now it’s
just the other way—the parents are in the wash house, while the
children are in the best rooms. Parents now are not expected to live at
all, but to exist altogether for their children.”

“Well, what if they like it better?” Lvov said, with his beautiful
smile, touching her hand. “Anyone who didn’t know you would think you
were a stepmother, not a true mother.”

“No, extremes are not good in anything,” Natalia said serenely, putting
his paper-knife straight in its proper place on the table.

“Well, come here, you perfect children,” Lvov said to the two handsome
boys who came in, and after bowing to Levin, went up to their father,
obviously wishing to ask him about something.

Levin would have liked to talk to them, to hear what they would say to
their father, but Natalia began talking to him, and then Lvov’s
colleague in the service, Mahotin, walked in, wearing his court
uniform, to go with him to meet someone, and a conversation was kept up
without a break upon Herzegovina, Princess Korzinskaya, the town
council, and the sudden death of Madame Apraksina.

Levin even forgot the commission intrusted to him. He recollected it as
he was going into the hall.

“Oh, Kitty told me to talk to you about Oblonsky,” he said, as Lvov was
standing on the stairs, seeing his wife and Levin off.

“Yes, yes, maman wants us, _les beaux-frères,_ to attack him,” he said,
blushing. “But why should I?”

“Well, then, I will attack him,” said Madame Lvova, with a smile,
standing in her white sheepskin cape, waiting till they had finished
speaking. “Come, let us go.”


Chapter 5

At the concert in the afternoon two very interesting things were
performed. One was a fantasia, _King Lear;_ the other was a quartette
dedicated to the memory of Bach. Both were new and in the new style,
and Levin was eager to form an opinion of them. After escorting his
sister-in-law to her stall, he stood against a column and tried to
listen as attentively and conscientiously as possible. He tried not to
let his attention be distracted, and not to spoil his impression by
looking at the conductor in a white tie, waving his arms, which always
disturbed his enjoyment of music so much, or the ladies in bonnets,
with strings carefully tied over their ears, and all these people
either thinking of nothing at all or thinking of all sorts of things
except the music. He tried to avoid meeting musical connoisseurs or
talkative acquaintances, and stood looking at the floor straight before
him, listening.

But the more he listened to the fantasia of _King Lear_ the further he
felt from forming any definite opinion of it. There was, as it were, a
continual beginning, a preparation of the musical expression of some
feeling, but it fell to pieces again directly, breaking into new
musical motives, or simply nothing but the whims of the composer,
exceedingly complex but disconnected sounds. And these fragmentary
musical expressions, though sometimes beautiful, were disagreeable,
because they were utterly unexpected and not led up to by anything.
Gaiety and grief and despair and tenderness and triumph followed one
another without any connection, like the emotions of a madman. And
those emotions, like a madman’s, sprang up quite unexpectedly.

During the whole of the performance Levin felt like a deaf man watching
people dancing, and was in a state of complete bewilderment when the
fantasia was over, and felt a great weariness from the fruitless strain
on his attention. Loud applause resounded on all sides. Everyone got
up, moved about, and began talking. Anxious to throw some light on his
own perplexity from the impressions of others, Levin began to walk
about, looking for connoisseurs, and was glad to see a well-known
musical amateur in conversation with Pestsov, whom he knew.

“Marvelous!” Pestsov was saying in his mellow bass. “How are you,
Konstantin Dmitrievitch? Particularly sculpturesque and plastic, so to
say, and richly colored is that passage where you feel Cordelia’s
approach, where woman, _das ewig Weibliche,_ enters into conflict with
fate. Isn’t it?”

“You mean ... what has Cordelia to do with it?” Levin asked timidly,
forgetting that the fantasia was supposed to represent King Lear.

“Cordelia comes in ... see here!” said Pestsov, tapping his finger on
the satiny surface of the program he held in his hand and passing it to
Levin.

Only then Levin recollected the title of the fantasia, and made haste
to read in the Russian translation the lines from Shakespeare that were
printed on the back of the program.

“You can’t follow it without that,” said Pestsov, addressing Levin, as
the person he had been speaking to had gone away, and he had no one to
talk to.

In the _entr’acte_ Levin and Pestsov fell into an argument upon the
merits and defects of music of the Wagner school. Levin maintained that
the mistake of Wagner and all his followers lay in their trying to take
music into the sphere of another art, just as poetry goes wrong when it
tries to paint a face as the art of painting ought to do, and as an
instance of this mistake he cited the sculptor who carved in marble
certain poetic phantasms flitting round the figure of the poet on the
pedestal. “These phantoms were so far from being phantoms that they
were positively clinging on the ladder,” said Levin. The comparison
pleased him, but he could not remember whether he had not used the same
phrase before, and to Pestsov, too, and as he said it he felt confused.

Pestsov maintained that art is one, and that it can attain its highest
manifestations only by conjunction with all kinds of art.

The second piece that was performed Levin could not hear. Pestsov, who
was standing beside him, was talking to him almost all the time,
condemning the music for its excessive affected assumption of
simplicity, and comparing it with the simplicity of the Pre-Raphaelites
in painting. As he went out Levin met many more acquaintances, with
whom he talked of politics, of music, and of common acquaintances.
Among others he met Count Bol, whom he had utterly forgotten to call
upon.

“Well, go at once then,” Madame Lvova said, when he told her; “perhaps
they’ll not be at home, and then you can come to the meeting to fetch
me. You’ll find me still there.”


Chapter 6

“Perhaps they’re not at home?” said Levin, as he went into the hall of
Countess Bola’s house.

“At home; please walk in,” said the porter, resolutely removing his
overcoat.

“How annoying!” thought Levin with a sigh, taking off one glove and
stroking his hat. “What did I come for? What have I to say to them?”

As he passed through the first drawing-room Levin met in the doorway
Countess Bola, giving some order to a servant with a care-worn and
severe face. On seeing Levin she smiled, and asked him to come into the
little drawing-room, where he heard voices. In this room there were
sitting in armchairs the two daughters of the countess, and a Moscow
colonel, whom Levin knew. Levin went up, greeted them, and sat down
beside the sofa with his hat on his knees.

“How is your wife? Have you been at the concert? We couldn’t go. Mamma
had to be at the funeral service.”

“Yes, I heard.... What a sudden death!” said Levin.

The countess came in, sat down on the sofa, and she too asked after his
wife and inquired about the concert.

Levin answered, and repeated an inquiry about Madame Apraksina’s sudden
death.

“But she was always in weak health.”

“Were you at the opera yesterday?”

“Yes, I was.”

“Lucca was very good.”

“Yes, very good,” he said, and as it was utterly of no consequence to
him what they thought of him, he began repeating what they had heard a
hundred times about the characteristics of the singer’s talent.
Countess Bola pretended to be listening. Then, when he had said enough
and paused, the colonel, who had been silent till then, began to talk.
The colonel too talked of the opera, and about culture. At last, after
speaking of the proposed _folle journée_ at Turin’s, the colonel
laughed, got up noisily, and went away. Levin too rose, but he saw by
the face of the countess that it was not yet time for him to go. He
must stay two minutes longer. He sat down.

But as he was thinking all the while how stupid it was, he could not
find a subject for conversation, and sat silent.

“You are not going to the public meeting? They say it will be very
interesting,” began the countess.

“No, I promised my _belle-sœur_ to fetch her from it,” said Levin.

A silence followed. The mother once more exchanged glances with a
daughter.

“Well, now I think the time has come,” thought Levin, and he got up.
The ladies shook hands with him, and begged him to say _mille choses_
to his wife for them.

The porter asked him, as he gave him his coat, “Where is your honor
staying?” and immediately wrote down his address in a big handsomely
bound book.

“Of course I don’t care, but still I feel ashamed and awfully stupid,”
thought Levin, consoling himself with the reflection that everyone does
it. He drove to the public meeting, where he was to find his
sister-in-law, so as to drive home with her.

At the public meeting of the committee there were a great many people,
and almost all the highest society. Levin was in time for the report
which, as everyone said, was very interesting. When the reading of the
report was over, people moved about, and Levin met Sviazhsky, who
invited him very pressingly to come that evening to a meeting of the
Society of Agriculture, where a celebrated lecture was to be delivered,
and Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had only just come from the races, and
many other acquaintances; and Levin heard and uttered various
criticisms on the meeting, on the new fantasia, and on a public trial.
But, probably from the mental fatigue he was beginning to feel, he made
a blunder in speaking of the trial, and this blunder he recalled
several times with vexation. Speaking of the sentence upon a foreigner
who had been condemned in Russia, and of how unfair it would be to
punish him by exile abroad, Levin repeated what he had heard the day
before in conversation from an acquaintance.

“I think sending him abroad is much the same as punishing a carp by
putting it into the water,” said Levin. Then he recollected that this
idea, which he had heard from an acquaintance and uttered as his own,
came from a fable of Krilov’s, and that the acquaintance had picked it
up from a newspaper article.

After driving home with his sister-in-law, and finding Kitty in good
spirits and quite well, Levin drove to the club.


Chapter 7

Levin reached the club just at the right time. Members and visitors
were driving up as he arrived. Levin had not been at the club for a
very long while—not since he lived in Moscow, when he was leaving the
university and going into society. He remembered the club, the external
details of its arrangement, but he had completely forgotten the
impression it had made on him in old days. But as soon as, driving into
the wide semicircular court and getting out of the sledge, he mounted
the steps, and the hall-porter, adorned with a crossway scarf,
noiselessly opened the door to him with a bow; as soon as he saw in the
porter’s room the cloaks and galoshes of members who thought it less
trouble to take them off downstairs; as soon as he heard the mysterious
ringing bell that preceded him as he ascended the easy, carpeted
staircase, and saw the statue on the landing, and the third porter at
the top doors, a familiar figure grown older, in the club livery,
opening the door without haste or delay, and scanning the visitors as
they passed in—Levin felt the old impression of the club come back in a
rush, an impression of repose, comfort, and propriety.

“Your hat, please,” the porter said to Levin, who forgot the club rule
to leave his hat in the porter’s room. “Long time since you’ve been.
The prince put your name down yesterday. Prince Stepan Arkadyevitch is
not here yet.”

The porter did not only know Levin, but also all his ties and
relationships, and so immediately mentioned his intimate friends.

Passing through the outer hall, divided up by screens, and the room
partitioned on the right, where a man sits at the fruit buffet, Levin
overtook an old man walking slowly in, and entered the dining-room full
of noise and people.

He walked along the tables, almost all full, and looked at the
visitors. He saw people of all sorts, old and young; some he knew a
little, some intimate friends. There was not a single cross or
worried-looking face. All seemed to have left their cares and anxieties
in the porter’s room with their hats, and were all deliberately getting
ready to enjoy the material blessings of life. Sviazhsky was here and
Shtcherbatsky, Nevyedovsky and the old prince, and Vronsky and Sergey
Ivanovitch.

“Ah! why are you late?” the prince said smiling, and giving him his
hand over his own shoulder. “How’s Kitty?” he added, smoothing out the
napkin he had tucked in at his waistcoat buttons.

“All right; they are dining at home, all the three of them.”

“Ah, ‘Aline-Nadine,’ to be sure! There’s no room with us. Go to that
table, and make haste and take a seat,” said the prince, and turning
away he carefully took a plate of eel soup.

“Levin, this way!” a good-natured voice shouted a little farther on. It
was Turovtsin. He was sitting with a young officer, and beside them
were two chairs turned upside down. Levin gladly went up to them. He
had always liked the good-hearted rake, Turovtsin—he was associated in
his mind with memories of his courtship—and at that moment, after the
strain of intellectual conversation, the sight of Turovtsin’s
good-natured face was particularly welcome.

“For you and Oblonsky. He’ll be here directly.”

The young man, holding himself very erect, with eyes forever twinkling
with enjoyment, was an officer from Petersburg, Gagin. Turovtsin
introduced them.

“Oblonsky’s always late.”

“Ah, here he is!”

“Have you only just come?” said Oblonsky, coming quickly towards them.
“Good day. Had some vodka? Well, come along then.”

Levin got up and went with him to the big table spread with spirits and
appetizers of the most various kinds. One would have thought that out
of two dozen delicacies one might find something to one’s taste, but
Stepan Arkadyevitch asked for something special, and one of the
liveried waiters standing by immediately brought what was required.
They drank a wine-glassful and returned to their table.

At once, while they were still at the soup, Gagin was served with
champagne, and told the waiter to fill four glasses. Levin did not
refuse the wine, and asked for a second bottle. He was very hungry, and
ate and drank with great enjoyment, and with still greater enjoyment
took part in the lively and simple conversation of his companions.
Gagin, dropping his voice, told the last good story from Petersburg,
and the story, though improper and stupid, was so ludicrous that Levin
broke into roars of laughter so loud that those near looked round.

“That’s in the same style as, ‘that’s a thing I can’t endure!’ You know
the story?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Ah, that’s exquisite! Another
bottle,” he said to the waiter, and he began to relate his good story.

“Pyotr Illyitch Vinovsky invites you to drink with him,” a little old
waiter interrupted Stepan Arkadyevitch, bringing two delicate glasses
of sparkling champagne, and addressing Stepan Arkadyevitch and Levin.
Stepan Arkadyevitch took the glass, and looking towards a bald man with
red mustaches at the other end of the table, he nodded to him, smiling.

“Who’s that?” asked Levin.

“You met him once at my place, don’t you remember? A good-natured
fellow.”

Levin did the same as Stepan Arkadyevitch and took the glass.

Stepan Arkadyevitch’s anecdote too was very amusing. Levin told his
story, and that too was successful. Then they talked of horses, of the
races, of what they had been doing that day, and of how smartly
Vronsky’s Atlas had won the first prize. Levin did not notice how the
time passed at dinner.

“Ah! and here they are!” Stepan Arkadyevitch said towards the end of
dinner, leaning over the back of his chair and holding out his hand to
Vronsky, who came up with a tall officer of the Guards. Vronsky’s face
too beamed with the look of good-humored enjoyment that was general in
the club. He propped his elbow playfully on Stepan Arkadyevitch’s
shoulder, whispering something to him, and he held out his hand to
Levin with the same good-humored smile.

“Very glad to meet you,” he said. “I looked out for you at the
election, but I was told you had gone away.”

“Yes, I left the same day. We’ve just been talking of your horse. I
congratulate you,” said Levin. “It was very rapidly run.”

“Yes; you’ve race horses too, haven’t you?”

“No, my father had; but I remember and know something about it.”

“Where have you dined?” asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“We were at the second table, behind the columns.”

“We’ve been celebrating his success,” said the tall colonel. “It’s his
second Imperial prize. I wish I might have the luck at cards he has
with horses. Well, why waste the precious time? I’m going to the
‘infernal regions,’” added the colonel, and he walked away.

“That’s Yashvin,” Vronsky said in answer to Turovtsin, and he sat down
in the vacated seat beside them. He drank the glass offered him, and
ordered a bottle of wine. Under the influence of the club atmosphere or
the wine he had drunk, Levin chatted away to Vronsky of the best breeds
of cattle, and was very glad not to feel the slightest hostility to
this man. He even told him, among other things, that he had heard from
his wife that she had met him at Princess Marya Borissovna’s.

“Ah, Princess Marya Borissovna, she’s exquisite!” said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, and he told an anecdote about her which set them all
laughing. Vronsky particularly laughed with such simplehearted
amusement that Levin felt quite reconciled to him.

“Well, have we finished?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting up with a
smile. “Let us go.”


Chapter 8

Getting up from the table, Levin walked with Gagin through the lofty
room to the billiard room, feeling his arms swing as he walked with a
peculiar lightness and ease. As he crossed the big room, he came upon
his father-in-law.

“Well, how do you like our Temple of Indolence?” said the prince,
taking his arm. “Come along, come along!”

“Yes, I wanted to walk about and look at everything. It’s interesting.”

“Yes, it’s interesting for you. But its interest for me is quite
different. You look at those little old men now,” he said, pointing to
a club member with bent back and projecting lip, shuffling towards them
in his soft boots, “and imagine that they were _shlupiks_ like that
from their birth up.”

“How _shlupiks_?”

“I see you don’t know that name. That’s our club designation. You know
the game of rolling eggs: when one’s rolled a long while it becomes a
_shlupik_. So it is with us; one goes on coming and coming to the club,
and ends by becoming a _shlupik_. Ah, you laugh! but we look out, for
fear of dropping into it ourselves. You know Prince Tchetchensky?”
inquired the prince; and Levin saw by his face that he was just going
to relate something funny.

“No, I don’t know him.”

“You don’t say so! Well, Prince Tchetchensky is a well-known figure. No
matter, though. He’s always playing billiards here. Only three years
ago he was not a _shlupik_ and kept up his spirits and even used to
call other people _shlupiks_. But one day he turns up, and our porter
... you know Vassily? Why, that fat one; he’s famous for his _bon
mots_. And so Prince Tchetchensky asks him, ‘Come, Vassily, who’s here?
Any _shlupiks_ here yet?’ And he says, ‘You’re the third.’ Yes, my dear
boy, that he did!”

Talking and greeting the friends they met, Levin and the prince walked
through all the rooms: the great room where tables had already been
set, and the usual partners were playing for small stakes; the divan
room, where they were playing chess, and Sergey Ivanovitch was sitting
talking to somebody; the billiard room, where, about a sofa in a
recess, there was a lively party drinking champagne—Gagin was one of
them. They peeped into the “infernal regions,” where a good many men
were crowding round one table, at which Yashvin was sitting. Trying not
to make a noise, they walked into the dark reading room, where under
the shaded lamps there sat a young man with a wrathful countenance,
turning over one journal after another, and a bald general buried in a
book. They went, too, into what the prince called the intellectual
room, where three gentlemen were engaged in a heated discussion of the
latest political news.

“Prince, please come, we’re ready,” said one of his card party, who had
come to look for him, and the prince went off. Levin sat down and
listened, but recalling all the conversation of the morning he felt all
of a sudden fearfully bored. He got up hurriedly, and went to look for
Oblonsky and Turovtsin, with whom it had been so pleasant.

Turovtsin was one of the circle drinking in the billiard room, and
Stepan Arkadyevitch was talking with Vronsky near the door at the
farther corner of the room.

“It’s not that she’s dull; but this undefined, this unsettled
position,” Levin caught, and he was hurrying away, but Stepan
Arkadyevitch called to him.

“Levin,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and Levin noticed that his eyes were
not full of tears exactly, but moist, which always happened when he had
been drinking, or when he was touched. Just now it was due to both
causes. “Levin, don’t go,” he said, and he warmly squeezed his arm
above the elbow, obviously not at all wishing to let him go.

“This is a true friend of mine—almost my greatest friend,” he said to
Vronsky. “You have become even closer and dearer to me. And I want you,
and I know you ought, to be friends, and great friends, because you’re
both splendid fellows.”

“Well, there’s nothing for us now but to kiss and be friends,” Vronsky
said, with good-natured playfulness, holding out his hand.

Levin quickly took the offered hand, and pressed it warmly.

“I’m very, very glad,” said Levin.

“Waiter, a bottle of champagne,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“And I’m very glad,” said Vronsky.

But in spite of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s desire, and their own desire,
they had nothing to talk about, and both felt it.

“Do you know, he has never met Anna?” Stepan Arkadyevitch said to
Vronsky. “And I want above everything to take him to see her. Let us
go, Levin!”

“Really?” said Vronsky. “She will be very glad to see you. I should be
going home at once,” he added, “but I’m worried about Yashvin, and I
want to stay on till he finishes.”

“Why, is he losing?”

“He keeps losing, and I’m the only friend that can restrain him.”

“Well, what do you say to pyramids? Levin, will you play? Capital!”
said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Get the table ready,” he said to the marker.

“It has been ready a long while,” answered the marker, who had already
set the balls in a triangle, and was knocking the red one about for his
own diversion.

“Well, let us begin.”

After the game Vronsky and Levin sat down at Gagin’s table, and at
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s suggestion Levin took a hand in the game.

Vronsky sat down at the table, surrounded by friends, who were
incessantly coming up to him. Every now and then he went to the
“infernal” to keep an eye on Yashvin. Levin was enjoying a delightful
sense of repose after the mental fatigue of the morning. He was glad
that all hostility was at an end with Vronsky, and the sense of peace,
decorum, and comfort never left him.

When the game was over, Stepan Arkadyevitch took Levin’s arm.

“Well, let us go to Anna’s, then. At once? Eh? She is at home. I
promised her long ago to bring you. Where were you meaning to spend the
evening?”

“Oh, nowhere specially. I promised Sviazhsky to go to the Society of
Agriculture. By all means, let us go,” said Levin.

“Very good; come along. Find out if my carriage is here,” Stepan
Arkadyevitch said to the waiter.

Levin went up to the table, paid the forty roubles he had lost; paid
his bill, the amount of which was in some mysterious way ascertained by
the little old waiter who stood at the counter, and swinging his arms
he walked through all the rooms to the way out.


Chapter 9

“Oblonsky’s carriage!” the porter shouted in an angry bass. The
carriage drove up and both got in. It was only for the first few
moments, while the carriage was driving out of the clubhouse gates,
that Levin was still under the influence of the club atmosphere of
repose, comfort, and unimpeachable good form. But as soon as the
carriage drove out into the street, and he felt it jolting over the
uneven road, heard the angry shout of a sledge driver coming towards
them, saw in the uncertain light the red blind of a tavern and the
shops, this impression was dissipated, and he began to think over his
actions, and to wonder whether he was doing right in going to see Anna.
What would Kitty say? But Stepan Arkadyevitch gave him no time for
reflection, and, as though divining his doubts, he scattered them.

“How glad I am,” he said, “that you should know her! You know Dolly has
long wished for it. And Lvov’s been to see her, and often goes. Though
she is my sister,” Stepan Arkadyevitch pursued, “I don’t hesitate to
say that she’s a remarkable woman. But you will see. Her position is
very painful, especially now.”

“Why especially now?”

“We are carrying on negotiations with her husband about a divorce. And
he’s agreed; but there are difficulties in regard to the son, and the
business, which ought to have been arranged long ago, has been dragging
on for three months past. As soon as the divorce is over, she will
marry Vronsky. How stupid these old ceremonies are, that no one
believes in, and which only prevent people being comfortable!” Stepan
Arkadyevitch put in. “Well, then their position will be as regular as
mine, as yours.”

“What is the difficulty?” said Levin.

“Oh, it’s a long and tedious story! The whole business is in such an
anomalous position with us. But the point is she has been for three
months in Moscow, where everyone knows her, waiting for the divorce;
she goes out nowhere, sees no woman except Dolly, because, do you
understand, she doesn’t care to have people come as a favor. That fool
Princess Varvara, even she has left her, considering this a breach of
propriety. Well, you see, in such a position any other woman would not
have found resources in herself. But you’ll see how she has arranged
her life—how calm, how dignified she is. To the left, in the crescent
opposite the church!” shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch, leaning out of the
window. “Phew! how hot it is!” he said, in spite of twelve degrees of
frost, flinging his open overcoat still wider open.

“But she has a daughter: no doubt she’s busy looking after her?” said
Levin.

“I believe you picture every woman simply as a female, _une couveuse,_”
said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “If she’s occupied, it must be with her
children. No, she brings her up capitally, I believe, but one doesn’t
hear about her. She’s busy, in the first place, with what she writes. I
see you’re smiling ironically, but you’re wrong. She’s writing a
children’s book, and doesn’t talk about it to anyone, but she read it
to me and I gave the manuscript to Vorkuev ... you know the publisher
... and he’s an author himself too, I fancy. He understands those
things, and he says it’s a remarkable piece of work. But are you
fancying she’s an authoress?—not a bit of it. She’s a woman with a
heart, before everything, but you’ll see. Now she has a little English
girl with her, and a whole family she’s looking after.”

“Oh, something in a philanthropic way?”

“Why, you will look at everything in the worst light. It’s not from
philanthropy, it’s from the heart. They—that is, Vronsky—had a trainer,
an Englishman, first-rate in his own line, but a drunkard. He’s
completely given up to drink—delirium tremens—and the family were cast
on the world. She saw them, helped them, got more and more interested
in them, and now the whole family is on her hands. But not by way of
patronage, you know, helping with money; she’s herself preparing the
boys in Russian for the high school, and she’s taken the little girl to
live with her. But you’ll see her for yourself.”

The carriage drove into the courtyard, and Stepan Arkadyevitch rang
loudly at the entrance where sledges were standing.

And without asking the servant who opened the door whether the lady
were at home, Stepan Arkadyevitch walked into the hall. Levin followed
him, more and more doubtful whether he was doing right or wrong.

Looking at himself in the glass, Levin noticed that he was red in the
face, but he felt certain he was not drunk, and he followed Stepan
Arkadyevitch up the carpeted stairs. At the top Stepan Arkadyevitch
inquired of the footman, who bowed to him as to an intimate friend, who
was with Anna Arkadyevna, and received the answer that it was M.
Vorkuev.

“Where are they?”

“In the study.”

Passing through the dining-room, a room not very large, with dark,
paneled walls, Stepan Arkadyevitch and Levin walked over the soft
carpet to the half-dark study, lighted up by a single lamp with a big
dark shade. Another lamp with a reflector was hanging on the wall,
lighting up a big full-length portrait of a woman, which Levin could
not help looking at. It was the portrait of Anna, painted in Italy by
Mihailov. While Stepan Arkadyevitch went behind the _treillage_, and
the man’s voice which had been speaking paused, Levin gazed at the
portrait, which stood out from the frame in the brilliant light thrown
on it, and he could not tear himself away from it. He positively forgot
where he was, and not even hearing what was said, he could not take his
eyes off the marvelous portrait. It was not a picture, but a living,
charming woman, with black curling hair, with bare arms and shoulders,
with a pensive smile on the lips, covered with soft down; triumphantly
and softly she looked at him with eyes that baffled him. She was not
living only because she was more beautiful than a living woman can be.

“I am delighted!” He heard suddenly near him a voice, unmistakably
addressing him, the voice of the very woman he had been admiring in the
portrait. Anna had come from behind the _treillage_ to meet him, and
Levin saw in the dim light of the study the very woman of the portrait,
in a dark blue shot gown, not in the same position nor with the same
expression, but with the same perfection of beauty which the artist had
caught in the portrait. She was less dazzling in reality, but, on the
other hand, there was something fresh and seductive in the living woman
which was not in the portrait.


Chapter 10

She had risen to meet him, not concealing her pleasure at seeing him;
and in the quiet ease with which she held out her little vigorous hand,
introduced him to Vorkuev and indicated a red-haired, pretty little
girl who was sitting at work, calling her her pupil, Levin recognized
and liked the manners of a woman of the great world, always
self-possessed and natural.

“I am delighted, delighted,” she repeated, and on her lips these simple
words took for Levin’s ears a special significance. “I have known you
and liked you for a long while, both from your friendship with Stiva
and for your wife’s sake.... I knew her for a very short time, but she
left on me the impression of an exquisite flower, simply a flower. And
to think she will soon be a mother!”

She spoke easily and without haste, looking now and then from Levin to
her brother, and Levin felt that the impression he was making was good,
and he felt immediately at home, simple and happy with her, as though
he had known her from childhood.

“Ivan Petrovitch and I settled in Alexey’s study,” she said in answer
to Stepan Arkadyevitch’s question whether he might smoke, “just so as
to be able to smoke”—and glancing at Levin, instead of asking whether
he would smoke, she pulled closer a tortoise-shell cigar-case and took
a cigarette.

“How are you feeling today?” her brother asked her.

“Oh, nothing. Nerves, as usual.”

“Yes, isn’t it extraordinarily fine?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
noticing that Levin was scrutinizing the picture.

“I have never seen a better portrait.”

“And extraordinarily like, isn’t it?” said Vorkuev.

Levin looked from the portrait to the original. A peculiar brilliance
lighted up Anna’s face when she felt his eyes on her. Levin flushed,
and to cover his confusion would have asked whether she had seen Darya
Alexandrovna lately; but at that moment Anna spoke. “We were just
talking, Ivan Petrovitch and I, of Vashtchenkov’s last pictures. Have
you seen them?”

“Yes, I have seen them,” answered Levin.

“But, I beg your pardon, I interrupted you ... you were saying?...”

Levin asked if she had seen Dolly lately.

“She was here yesterday. She was very indignant with the high school
people on Grisha’s account. The Latin teacher, it seems, had been
unfair to him.”

“Yes, I have seen his pictures. I didn’t care for them very much,”
Levin went back to the subject she had started.

Levin talked now not at all with that purely businesslike attitude to
the subject with which he had been talking all the morning. Every word
in his conversation with her had a special significance. And talking to
her was pleasant; still pleasanter it was to listen to her.

Anna talked not merely naturally and cleverly, but cleverly and
carelessly, attaching no value to her own ideas and giving great weight
to the ideas of the person she was talking to.

The conversation turned on the new movement in art, on the new
illustrations of the Bible by a French artist. Vorkuev attacked the
artist for a realism carried to the point of coarseness.

Levin said that the French had carried conventionality further than
anyone, and that consequently they see a great merit in the return to
realism. In the fact of not lying they see poetry.

Never had anything clever said by Levin given him so much pleasure as
this remark. Anna’s face lighted up at once, as at once she appreciated
the thought. She laughed.

“I laugh,” she said, “as one laughs when one sees a very true portrait.
What you said so perfectly hits off French art now, painting and
literature too, indeed—Zola, Daudet. But perhaps it is always so, that
men form their conceptions from fictitious, conventional types, and
then—all the _combinaisons_ made—they are tired of the fictitious
figures and begin to invent more natural, true figures.”

“That’s perfectly true,” said Vorknev.

“So you’ve been at the club?” she said to her brother.

“Yes, yes, this is a woman!” Levin thought, forgetting himself and
staring persistently at her lovely, mobile face, which at that moment
was all at once completely transformed. Levin did not hear what she was
talking of as she leaned over to her brother, but he was struck by the
change of her expression. Her face—so handsome a moment before in its
repose—suddenly wore a look of strange curiosity, anger, and pride. But
this lasted only an instant. She dropped her eyelids, as though
recollecting something.

“Oh, well, but that’s of no interest to anyone,” she said, and she
turned to the English girl.

“Please order the tea in the drawing-room,” she said in English.

The girl got up and went out.

“Well, how did she get through her examination?” asked Stepan
Arkadyevitch.

“Splendidly! She’s a very gifted child and a sweet character.”

“It will end in your loving her more than your own.”

“There a man speaks. In love there’s no more nor less. I love my
daughter with one love, and her with another.”

“I was just telling Anna Arkadyevna,” said Vorkuev, “that if she were
to put a hundredth part of the energy she devotes to this English girl
to the public question of the education of Russian children, she would
be doing a great and useful work.”

“Yes, but I can’t help it; I couldn’t do it. Count Alexey Kirillovitch
urged me very much” (as she uttered the words _Count Alexey
Kirillovitch_ she glanced with appealing timidity at Levin, and he
unconsciously responded with a respectful and reassuring look); “he
urged me to take up the school in the village. I visited it several
times. The children were very nice, but I could not feel drawn to the
work. You speak of energy. Energy rests upon love; and come as it will,
there’s no forcing it. I took to this child—I could not myself say
why.”

And she glanced again at Levin. And her smile and her glance—all told
him that it was to him only she was addressing her words, valuing his
good opinion, and at the same time sure beforehand that they understood
each other.

“I quite understand that,” Levin answered. “It’s impossible to give
one’s heart to a school or such institutions in general, and I believe
that’s just why philanthropic institutions always give such poor
results.”

She was silent for a while, then she smiled.

“Yes, yes,” she agreed; “I never could. _Je n’ai pas le cœur assez_
large to love a whole asylum of horrid little girls. _Cela ne m’a
jamais réussi._ There are so many women who have made themselves _une
position sociale_ in that way. And now more than ever,” she said with a
mournful, confiding expression, ostensibly addressing her brother, but
unmistakably intending her words only for Levin, “now when I have such
need of some occupation, I cannot.” And suddenly frowning (Levin saw
that she was frowning at herself for talking about herself) she changed
the subject. “I know about you,” she said to Levin; “that you’re not a
public-spirited citizen, and I have defended you to the best of my
ability.”

“How have you defended me?”

“Oh, according to the attacks made on you. But won’t you have some
tea?” She rose and took up a book bound in morocco.

“Give it to me, Anna Arkadyevna,” said Vorkuev, indicating the book.
“It’s well worth taking up.”

“Oh, no, it’s all so sketchy.”

“I told him about it,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his sister, nodding
at Levin.

“You shouldn’t have. My writing is something after the fashion of those
little baskets and carving which Liza Mertsalova used to sell me from
the prisons. She had the direction of the prison department in that
society,” she turned to Levin; “and they were miracles of patience, the
work of those poor wretches.”

And Levin saw a new trait in this woman, who attracted him so
extraordinarily. Besides wit, grace, and beauty, she had truth. She had
no wish to hide from him all the bitterness of her position. As she
said that she sighed, and her face suddenly taking a hard expression,
looked as it were turned to stone. With that expression on her face she
was more beautiful than ever; but the expression was new; it was
utterly unlike that expression, radiant with happiness and creating
happiness, which had been caught by the painter in her portrait. Levin
looked more than once at the portrait and at her figure, as taking her
brother’s arm she walked with him to the high doors and he felt for her
a tenderness and pity at which he wondered himself.

She asked Levin and Vorkuev to go into the drawing-room, while she
stayed behind to say a few words to her brother. “About her divorce,
about Vronsky, and what he’s doing at the club, about me?” wondered
Levin. And he was so keenly interested by the question of what she was
saying to Stepan Arkadyevitch, that he scarcely heard what Vorkuev was
telling him of the qualities of the story for children Anna Arkadyevna
had written.

At tea the same pleasant sort of talk, full of interesting matter,
continued. There was not a single instant when a subject for
conversation was to seek; on the contrary, it was felt that one had
hardly time to say what one had to say, and eagerly held back to hear
what the others were saying. And all that was said, not only by her,
but by Vorkuev and Stepan Arkadyevitch—all, so it seemed to Levin,
gained peculiar significance from her appreciation and her criticism.
While he followed this interesting conversation, Levin was all the time
admiring her—her beauty, her intelligence, her culture, and at the same
time her directness and genuine depth of feeling. He listened and
talked, and all the while he was thinking of her inner life, trying to
divine her feelings. And though he had judged her so severely hitherto,
now by some strange chain of reasoning he was justifying her and was
also sorry for her, and afraid that Vronsky did not fully understand
her. At eleven o’clock, when Stepan Arkadyevitch got up to go (Vorkuev
had left earlier), it seemed to Levin that he had only just come.
Regretfully Levin too rose.

“Good-bye,” she said, holding his hand and glancing into his face with
a winning look. “I am very glad _que la glace est rompue._”

She dropped his hand, and half closed her eyes.

“Tell your wife that I love her as before, and that if she cannot
pardon me my position, then my wish for her is that she may never
pardon it. To pardon it, one must go through what I have gone through,
and may God spare her that.”

“Certainly, yes, I will tell her....” Levin said, blushing.


Chapter 11

“What a marvelous, sweet and unhappy woman!” he was thinking, as he
stepped out into the frosty air with Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“Well, didn’t I tell you?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, seeing that Levin
had been completely won over.

“Yes,” said Levin dreamily, “an extraordinary woman! It’s not her
cleverness, but she has such wonderful depth of feeling. I’m awfully
sorry for her!”

“Now, please God, everything will soon be settled. Well, well, don’t be
hard on people in future,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, opening the
carriage door. “Good-bye; we don’t go the same way.”

Still thinking of Anna, of everything, even the simplest phrase in
their conversation with her, and recalling the minutest changes in her
expression, entering more and more into her position, and feeling
sympathy for her, Levin reached home.



At home Kouzma told Levin that Katerina Alexandrovna was quite well,
and that her sisters had not long been gone, and he handed him two
letters. Levin read them at once in the hall, that he might not
overlook them later. One was from Sokolov, his bailiff. Sokolov wrote
that the corn could not be sold, that it was fetching only five and a
half roubles, and that more than that could not be got for it. The
other letter was from his sister. She scolded him for her business
being still unsettled.

“Well, we must sell it at five and a half if we can’t get more,” Levin
decided the first question, which had always before seemed such a
weighty one, with extraordinary facility on the spot. “It’s
extraordinary how all one’s time is taken up here,” he thought,
considering the second letter. He felt himself to blame for not having
got done what his sister had asked him to do for her. “Today, again,
I’ve not been to the court, but today I’ve certainly not had time.” And
resolving that he would not fail to do it next day, he went up to his
wife. As he went in, Levin rapidly ran through mentally the day he had
spent. All the events of the day were conversations, conversations he
had heard and taken part in. All the conversations were upon subjects
which, if he had been alone at home, he would never have taken up, but
here they were very interesting. And all these conversations were right
enough, only in two places there was something not quite right. One was
what he had said about the carp, the other was something not “quite the
thing” in the tender sympathy he was feeling for Anna.

Levin found his wife low-spirited and dull. The dinner of the three
sisters had gone off very well, but then they had waited and waited for
him, all of them had felt dull, the sisters had departed, and she had
been left alone.

“Well, and what have you been doing?” she asked him, looking straight
into his eyes, which shone with rather a suspicious brightness. But
that she might not prevent his telling her everything, she concealed
her close scrutiny of him, and with an approving smile listened to his
account of how he had spent the evening.

“Well, I’m very glad I met Vronsky. I felt quite at ease and natural
with him. You understand, I shall try not to see him, but I’m glad that
this awkwardness is all over,” he said, and remembering that by way of
trying not to see him, he had immediately gone to call on Anna, he
blushed. “We talk about the peasants drinking; I don’t know which
drinks most, the peasantry or our own class; the peasants do on
holidays, but....”

But Kitty took not the slightest interest in discussing the drinking
habits of the peasants. She saw that he blushed, and she wanted to know
why.

“Well, and then where did you go?”

“Stiva urged me awfully to go and see Anna Arkadyevna.”

And as he said this, Levin blushed even more, and his doubts as to
whether he had done right in going to see Anna were settled once for
all. He knew now that he ought not to have done so.

Kitty’s eyes opened in a curious way and gleamed at Anna’s name, but
controlling herself with an effort, she concealed her emotion and
deceived him.

“Oh!” was all she said.

“I’m sure you won’t be angry at my going. Stiva begged me to, and Dolly
wished it,” Levin went on.

“Oh, no!” she said, but he saw in her eyes a constraint that boded him
no good.

“She is a very sweet, very, very unhappy, good woman,” he said, telling
her about Anna, her occupations, and what she had told him to say to
her.

“Yes, of course, she is very much to be pitied,” said Kitty, when he
had finished. “Whom was your letter from?”

He told her, and believing in her calm tone, he went to change his
coat.

Coming back, he found Kitty in the same easy chair. When he went up to
her, she glanced at him and broke into sobs.

“What? what is it?” he asked, knowing beforehand what.

“You’re in love with that hateful woman; she has bewitched you! I saw
it in your eyes. Yes, yes! What can it all lead to? You were drinking
at the club, drinking and gambling, and then you went ... to her of all
people! No, we must go away.... I shall go away tomorrow.”

It was a long while before Levin could soothe his wife. At last he
succeeded in calming her, only by confessing that a feeling of pity, in
conjunction with the wine he had drunk, had been too much for him, that
he had succumbed to Anna’s artful influence, and that he would avoid
her. One thing he did with more sincerity confess to was that living so
long in Moscow, a life of nothing but conversation, eating and
drinking, he was degenerating. They talked till three o’clock in the
morning. Only at three o’clock were they sufficiently reconciled to be
able to go to sleep.


Chapter 12

After taking leave of her guests, Anna did not sit down, but began
walking up and down the room. She had unconsciously the whole evening
done her utmost to arouse in Levin a feeling of love—as of late she had
fallen into doing with all young men—and she knew she had attained her
aim, as far as was possible in one evening, with a married and
conscientious man. She liked him indeed extremely, and, in spite of the
striking difference, from the masculine point of view, between Vronsky
and Levin, as a woman she saw something they had in common, which had
made Kitty able to love both. Yet as soon as he was out of the room,
she ceased to think of him.

One thought, and one only, pursued her in different forms, and refused
to be shaken off. “If I have so much effect on others, on this man, who
loves his home and his wife, why is it _he_ is so cold to me?... not
cold exactly, he loves me, I know that! But something new is drawing us
apart now. Why wasn’t he here all the evening? He told Stiva to say he
could not leave Yashvin, and must watch over his play. Is Yashvin a
child? But supposing it’s true. He never tells a lie. But there’s
something else in it if it’s true. He is glad of an opportunity of
showing me that he has other duties; I know that, I submit to that. But
why prove that to me? He wants to show me that his love for me is not
to interfere with his freedom. But I need no proofs, I need love. He
ought to understand all the bitterness of this life for me here in
Moscow. Is this life? I am not living, but waiting for an event, which
is continually put off and put off. No answer again! And Stiva says he
cannot go to Alexey Alexandrovitch. And I can’t write again. I can do
nothing, can begin nothing, can alter nothing; I hold myself in, I
wait, inventing amusements for myself—the English family, writing,
reading—but it’s all nothing but a sham, it’s all the same as morphine.
He ought to feel for me,” she said, feeling tears of self-pity coming
into her eyes.

She heard Vronsky’s abrupt ring and hurriedly dried her tears—not only
dried her tears, but sat down by a lamp and opened a book, affecting
composure. She wanted to show him that she was displeased that he had
not come home as he had promised—displeased only, and not on any
account to let him see her distress, and least of all, her self-pity.
She might pity herself, but he must not pity her. She did not want
strife, she blamed him for wanting to quarrel, but unconsciously put
herself into an attitude of antagonism.

“Well, you’ve not been dull?” he said, eagerly and good-humoredly,
going up to her. “What a terrible passion it is—gambling!”

“No, I’ve not been dull; I’ve learned long ago not to be dull. Stiva
has been here and Levin.”

“Yes, they meant to come and see you. Well, how did you like Levin?” he
said, sitting down beside her.

“Very much. They have not long been gone. What was Yashvin doing?”

“He was winning—seventeen thousand. I got him away. He had really
started home, but he went back again, and now he’s losing.”

“Then what did you stay for?” she asked, suddenly lifting her eyes to
him. The expression of her face was cold and ungracious. “You told
Stiva you were staying on to get Yashvin away. And you have left him
there.”

The same expression of cold readiness for the conflict appeared on his
face too.

“In the first place, I did not ask him to give you any message; and
secondly, I never tell lies. But what’s the chief point, I wanted to
stay, and I stayed,” he said, frowning. “Anna, what is it for, why will
you?” he said after a moment’s silence, bending over towards her, and
he opened his hand, hoping she would lay hers in it.

She was glad of this appeal for tenderness. But some strange force of
evil would not let her give herself up to her feelings, as though the
rules of warfare would not permit her to surrender.

“Of course you wanted to stay, and you stayed. You do everything you
want to. But what do you tell me that for? With what object?” she said,
getting more and more excited. “Does anyone contest your rights? But
you want to be right, and you’re welcome to be right.”

His hand closed, he turned away, and his face wore a still more
obstinate expression.

“For you it’s a matter of obstinacy,” she said, watching him intently
and suddenly finding the right word for that expression that irritated
her, “simply obstinacy. For you it’s a question of whether you keep the
upper hand of me, while for me....” Again she felt sorry for herself,
and she almost burst into tears. “If you knew what it is for me! When I
feel as I do now that you are hostile, yes, hostile to me, if you knew
what this means for me! If you knew how I feel on the brink of calamity
at this instant, how afraid I am of myself!” And she turned away,
hiding her sobs.

“But what are you talking about?” he said, horrified at her expression
of despair, and again bending over her, he took her hand and kissed it.
“What is it for? Do I seek amusements outside our home? Don’t I avoid
the society of women?”

“Well, yes! If that were all!” she said.

“Come, tell me what I ought to do to give you peace of mind? I am ready
to do anything to make you happy,” he said, touched by her expression
of despair; “what wouldn’t I do to save you from distress of any sort,
as now, Anna!” he said.

“It’s nothing, nothing!” she said. “I don’t know myself whether it’s
the solitary life, my nerves.... Come, don’t let us talk of it. What
about the race? You haven’t told me!” she inquired, trying to conceal
her triumph at the victory, which had anyway been on her side.

He asked for supper, and began telling her about the races; but in his
tone, in his eyes, which became more and more cold, she saw that he did
not forgive her for her victory, that the feeling of obstinacy with
which she had been struggling had asserted itself again in him. He was
colder to her than before, as though he were regretting his surrender.
And she, remembering the words that had given her the victory, “how I
feel on the brink of calamity, how afraid I am of myself,” saw that
this weapon was a dangerous one, and that it could not be used a second
time. And she felt that beside the love that bound them together there
had grown up between them some evil spirit of strife, which she could
not exorcise from his, and still less from her own heart.


Chapter 13

There are no conditions to which a man cannot become used, especially
if he sees that all around him are living in the same way. Levin could
not have believed three months before that he could have gone quietly
to sleep in the condition in which he was that day, that leading an
aimless, irrational life, living too beyond his means, after drinking
to excess (he could not call what happened at the club anything else),
forming inappropriately friendly relations with a man with whom his
wife had once been in love, and a still more inappropriate call upon a
woman who could only be called a lost woman, after being fascinated by
that woman and causing his wife distress—he could still go quietly to
sleep. But under the influence of fatigue, a sleepless night, and the
wine he had drunk, his sleep was sound and untroubled.

At five o’clock the creak of a door opening waked him. He jumped up and
looked round. Kitty was not in bed beside him. But there was a light
moving behind the screen, and he heard her steps.

“What is it?... what is it?” he said, half-asleep. “Kitty! What is it?”

“Nothing,” she said, coming from behind the screen with a candle in her
hand. “I felt unwell,” she said, smiling a particularly sweet and
meaning smile.

“What? has it begun?” he said in terror. “We ought to send....” and
hurriedly he reached after his clothes.

“No, no,” she said, smiling and holding his hand. “It’s sure to be
nothing. I was rather unwell, only a little. It’s all over now.”

And getting into bed, she blew out the candle, lay down and was still.
Though he thought her stillness suspicious, as though she were holding
her breath, and still more suspicious the expression of peculiar
tenderness and excitement with which, as she came from behind the
screen, she said “nothing,” he was so sleepy that he fell asleep at
once. Only later he remembered the stillness of her breathing, and
understood all that must have been passing in her sweet, precious heart
while she lay beside him, not stirring, in anticipation of the greatest
event in a woman’s life. At seven o’clock he was waked by the touch of
her hand on his shoulder, and a gentle whisper. She seemed struggling
between regret at waking him, and the desire to talk to him.

“Kostya, don’t be frightened. It’s all right. But I fancy.... We ought
to send for Lizaveta Petrovna.”

The candle was lighted again. She was sitting up in bed, holding some
knitting, which she had been busy upon during the last few days.

“Please, don’t be frightened, it’s all right. I’m not a bit afraid,”
she said, seeing his scared face, and she pressed his hand to her bosom
and then to her lips.

He hurriedly jumped up, hardly awake, and kept his eyes fixed on her,
as he put on his dressing gown; then he stopped, still looking at her.
He had to go, but he could not tear himself from her eyes. He thought
he loved her face, knew her expression, her eyes, but never had he seen
it like this. How hateful and horrible he seemed to himself, thinking
of the distress he had caused her yesterday. Her flushed face, fringed
with soft curling hair under her night cap, was radiant with joy and
courage.

Though there was so little that was complex or artificial in Kitty’s
character in general, Levin was struck by what was revealed now, when
suddenly all disguises were thrown off and the very kernel of her soul
shone in her eyes. And in this simplicity and nakedness of her soul,
she, the very woman he loved in her, was more manifest than ever. She
looked at him, smiling; but all at once her brows twitched, she threw
up her head, and going quickly up to him, clutched his hand and pressed
close up to him, breathing her hot breath upon him. She was in pain and
was, as it were, complaining to him of her suffering. And for the first
minute, from habit, it seemed to him that he was to blame. But in her
eyes there was a tenderness that told him that she was far from
reproaching him, that she loved him for her sufferings. “If not I, who
is to blame for it?” he thought unconsciously, seeking someone
responsible for this suffering for him to punish; but there was no one
responsible. She was suffering, complaining, and triumphing in her
sufferings, and rejoicing in them, and loving them. He saw that
something sublime was being accomplished in her soul, but what? He
could not make it out. It was beyond his understanding.

“I have sent to mamma. You go quickly to fetch Lizaveta Petrovna ...
Kostya!... Nothing, it’s over.”

She moved away from him and rang the bell.

“Well, go now; Pasha’s coming. I am all right.”

And Levin saw with astonishment that she had taken up the knitting she
had brought in in the night and begun working at it again.

As Levin was going out of one door, he heard the maid-servant come in
at the other. He stood at the door and heard Kitty giving exact
directions to the maid, and beginning to help her move the bedstead.

He dressed, and while they were putting in his horses, as a hired
sledge was not to be seen yet, he ran again up to the bedroom, not on
tiptoe, it seemed to him, but on wings. Two maid-servants were
carefully moving something in the bedroom.

Kitty was walking about knitting rapidly and giving directions.

“I’m going for the doctor. They have sent for Lizaveta Petrovna, but
I’ll go on there too. Isn’t there anything wanted? Yes, shall I go to
Dolly’s?”

She looked at him, obviously not hearing what he was saying.

“Yes, yes. Do go,” she said quickly, frowning and waving her hand to
him.

He had just gone into the drawing-room, when suddenly a plaintive moan
sounded from the bedroom, smothered instantly. He stood still, and for
a long while he could not understand.

“Yes, that is she,” he said to himself, and clutching at his head he
ran downstairs.

“Lord have mercy on us! pardon us! aid us!” he repeated the words that
for some reason came suddenly to his lips. And he, an unbeliever,
repeated these words not with his lips only. At that instant he knew
that all his doubts, even the impossibility of believing with his
reason, of which he was aware in himself, did not in the least hinder
his turning to God. All of that now floated out of his soul like dust.
To whom was he to turn if not to Him in whose hands he felt himself,
his soul, and his love?

The horse was not yet ready, but feeling a peculiar concentration of
his physical forces and his intellect on what he had to do, he started
off on foot without waiting for the horse, and told Kouzma to overtake
him.

At the corner he met a night cabman driving hurriedly. In the little
sledge, wrapped in a velvet cloak, sat Lizaveta Petrovna with a
kerchief round her head. “Thank God! thank God!” he said, overjoyed to
recognize her little fair face which wore a peculiarly serious, even
stern expression. Telling the driver not to stop, he ran along beside
her.

“For two hours, then? Not more?” she inquired. “You should let Pyotr
Dmitrievitch know, but don’t hurry him. And get some opium at the
chemist’s.”

“So you think that it may go on well? Lord have mercy on us and help
us!” Levin said, seeing his own horse driving out of the gate. Jumping
into the sledge beside Kouzma, he told him to drive to the doctor’s.


Chapter 14

The doctor was not yet up, and the footman said that “he had been up
late, and had given orders not to be waked, but would get up soon.” The
footman was cleaning the lamp-chimneys, and seemed very busy about
them. This concentration of the footman upon his lamps, and his
indifference to what was passing in Levin, at first astounded him, but
immediately on considering the question he realized that no one knew or
was bound to know his feelings, and that it was all the more necessary
to act calmly, sensibly, and resolutely to get through this wall of
indifference and attain his aim.

“Don’t be in a hurry or let anything slip,” Levin said to himself,
feeling a greater and greater flow of physical energy and attention to
all that lay before him to do.

Having ascertained that the doctor was not getting up, Levin considered
various plans, and decided on the following one: that Kouzma should go
for another doctor, while he himself should go to the chemist’s for
opium, and if when he came back the doctor had not yet begun to get up,
he would either by tipping the footman, or by force, wake the doctor at
all hazards.

At the chemist’s the lank shopman sealed up a packet of powders for a
coachman who stood waiting, and refused him opium with the same
callousness with which the doctor’s footman had cleaned his lamp
chimneys. Trying not to get flurried or out of temper, Levin mentioned
the names of the doctor and midwife, and explaining what the opium was
needed for, tried to persuade him. The assistant inquired in German
whether he should give it, and receiving an affirmative reply from
behind the partition, he took out a bottle and a funnel, deliberately
poured the opium from a bigger bottle into a little one, stuck on a
label, sealed it up, in spite of Levin’s request that he would not do
so, and was about to wrap it up too. This was more than Levin could
stand; he took the bottle firmly out of his hands, and ran to the big
glass doors. The doctor was not even now getting up, and the footman,
busy now in putting down the rugs, refused to wake him. Levin
deliberately took out a ten rouble note, and, careful to speak slowly,
though losing no time over the business, he handed him the note, and
explained that Pyotr Dmitrievitch (what a great and important personage
he seemed to Levin now, this Pyotr Dmitrievitch, who had been of so
little consequence in his eyes before!) had promised to come at any
time; that he would certainly not be angry! and that he must therefore
wake him at once.

The footman agreed, and went upstairs, taking Levin into the waiting
room.

Levin could hear through the door the doctor coughing, moving about,
washing, and saying something. Three minutes passed; it seemed to Levin
that more than an hour had gone by. He could not wait any longer.

“Pyotr Dmitrievitch, Pyotr Dmitrievitch!” he said in an imploring voice
at the open door. “For God’s sake, forgive me! See me as you are. It’s
been going on more than two hours already.”

“In a minute; in a minute!” answered a voice, and to his amazement
Levin heard that the doctor was smiling as he spoke.

“For one instant.”

“In a minute.”

Two minutes more passed while the doctor was putting on his boots, and
two minutes more while the doctor put on his coat and combed his hair.

“Pyotr Dmitrievitch!” Levin was beginning again in a plaintive voice,
just as the doctor came in dressed and ready. “These people have no
conscience,” thought Levin. “Combing his hair, while we’re dying!”

“Good morning!” the doctor said to him, shaking hands, and, as it were,
teasing him with his composure. “There’s no hurry. Well now?”

Trying to be as accurate as possible, Levin began to tell him every
unnecessary detail of his wife’s condition, interrupting his account
repeatedly with entreaties that the doctor would come with him at once.

“Oh, you needn’t be in any hurry. You don’t understand, you know. I’m
certain I’m not wanted, still I’ve promised, and if you like, I’ll
come. But there’s no hurry. Please sit down; won’t you have some
coffee?”

Levin stared at him with eyes that asked whether he was laughing at
him; but the doctor had no notion of making fun of him.

“I know, I know,” the doctor said, smiling; “I’m a married man myself;
and at these moments we husbands are very much to be pitied. I’ve a
patient whose husband always takes refuge in the stables on such
occasions.”

“But what do you think, Pyotr Dmitrievitch? Do you suppose it may go
all right?”

“Everything points to a favorable issue.”

“So you’ll come immediately?” said Levin, looking wrathfully at the
servant who was bringing in the coffee.

“In an hour’s time.”

“Oh, for mercy’s sake!”

“Well, let me drink my coffee, anyway.”

The doctor started upon his coffee. Both were silent.

“The Turks are really getting beaten, though. Did you read yesterday’s
telegrams?” said the doctor, munching some roll.

“No, I can’t stand it!” said Levin, jumping up. “So you’ll be with us
in a quarter of an hour.”

“In half an hour.”

“On your honor?”

When Levin got home, he drove up at the same time as the princess, and
they went up to the bedroom door together. The princess had tears in
her eyes, and her hands were shaking. Seeing Levin, she embraced him,
and burst into tears.

“Well, my dear Lizaveta Petrovna?” she queried, clasping the hand of
the midwife, who came out to meet them with a beaming and anxious face.

“She’s going on well,” she said; “persuade her to lie down. She will be
easier so.”

From the moment when he had waked up and understood what was going on,
Levin had prepared his mind to bear resolutely what was before him, and
without considering or anticipating anything, to avoid upsetting his
wife, and on the contrary to soothe her and keep up her courage.
Without allowing himself even to think of what was to come, of how it
would end, judging from his inquiries as to the usual duration of these
ordeals, Levin had in his imagination braced himself to bear up and to
keep a tight rein on his feelings for five hours, and it had seemed to
him he could do this. But when he came back from the doctor’s and saw
her sufferings again, he fell to repeating more and more frequently:
“Lord, have mercy on us, and succor us!” He sighed, and flung his head
up, and began to feel afraid he could not bear it, that he would burst
into tears or run away. Such agony it was to him. And only one hour had
passed.

But after that hour there passed another hour, two hours, three, the
full five hours he had fixed as the furthest limit of his sufferings,
and the position was still unchanged; and he was still bearing it
because there was nothing to be done but bear it; every instant feeling
that he had reached the utmost limits of his endurance, and that his
heart would break with sympathy and pain.

But still the minutes passed by and the hours, and still hours more,
and his misery and horror grew and were more and more intense.

All the ordinary conditions of life, without which one can form no
conception of anything, had ceased to exist for Levin. He lost all
sense of time. Minutes—those minutes when she sent for him and he held
her moist hand, that would squeeze his hand with extraordinary violence
and then push it away—seemed to him hours, and hours seemed to him
minutes. He was surprised when Lizaveta Petrovna asked him to light a
candle behind a screen, and he found that it was five o’clock in the
afternoon. If he had been told it was only ten o’clock in the morning,
he would not have been more surprised. Where he was all this time, he
knew as little as the time of anything. He saw her swollen face,
sometimes bewildered and in agony, sometimes smiling and trying to
reassure him. He saw the old princess too, flushed and overwrought,
with her gray curls in disorder, forcing herself to gulp down her
tears, biting her lips; he saw Dolly too and the doctor, smoking fat
cigarettes, and Lizaveta Petrovna with a firm, resolute, reassuring
face, and the old prince walking up and down the hall with a frowning
face. But why they came in and went out, where they were, he did not
know. The princess was with the doctor in the bedroom, then in the
study, where a table set for dinner suddenly appeared; then she was not
there, but Dolly was. Then Levin remembered he had been sent somewhere.
Once he had been sent to move a table and sofa. He had done this
eagerly, thinking it had to be done for her sake, and only later on he
found it was his own bed he had been getting ready. Then he had been
sent to the study to ask the doctor something. The doctor had answered
and then had said something about the irregularities in the municipal
council. Then he had been sent to the bedroom to help the old princess
to move the holy picture in its silver and gold setting, and with the
princess’s old waiting maid he had clambered on a shelf to reach it and
had broken the little lamp, and the old servant had tried to reassure
him about the lamp and about his wife, and he carried the holy picture
and set it at Kitty’s head, carefully tucking it in behind the pillow.
But where, when, and why all this had happened, he could not tell. He
did not understand why the old princess took his hand, and looking
compassionately at him, begged him not to worry himself, and Dolly
persuaded him to eat something and led him out of the room, and even
the doctor looked seriously and with commiseration at him and offered
him a drop of something.

All he knew and felt was that what was happening was what had happened
nearly a year before in the hotel of the country town at the deathbed
of his brother Nikolay. But that had been grief—this was joy. Yet that
grief and this joy were alike outside all the ordinary conditions of
life; they were loop-holes, as it were, in that ordinary life through
which there came glimpses of something sublime. And in the
contemplation of this sublime something the soul was exalted to
inconceivable heights of which it had before had no conception, while
reason lagged behind, unable to keep up with it.

“Lord, have mercy on us, and succor us!” he repeated to himself
incessantly, feeling, in spite of his long and, as it seemed, complete
alienation from religion, that he turned to God just as trustfully and
simply as he had in his childhood and first youth.

All this time he had two distinct spiritual conditions. One was away
from her, with the doctor, who kept smoking one fat cigarette after
another and extinguishing them on the edge of a full ashtray, with
Dolly, and with the old prince, where there was talk about dinner,
about politics, about Marya Petrovna’s illness, and where Levin
suddenly forgot for a minute what was happening, and felt as though he
had waked up from sleep; the other was in her presence, at her pillow,
where his heart seemed breaking and still did not break from
sympathetic suffering, and he prayed to God without ceasing. And every
time he was brought back from a moment of oblivion by a scream reaching
him from the bedroom, he fell into the same strange terror that had
come upon him the first minute. Every time he heard a shriek, he jumped
up, ran to justify himself, remembered on the way that he was not to
blame, and he longed to defend her, to help her. But as he looked at
her, he saw again that help was impossible, and he was filled with
terror and prayed: “Lord, have mercy on us, and help us!” And as time
went on, both these conditions became more intense; the calmer he
became away from her, completely forgetting her, the more agonizing
became both her sufferings and his feeling of helplessness before them.
He jumped up, would have liked to run away, but ran to her.

Sometimes, when again and again she called upon him, he blamed her; but
seeing her patient, smiling face, and hearing the words, “I am worrying
you,” he threw the blame on God; but thinking of God, at once he fell
to beseeching God to forgive him and have mercy.


Chapter 15

He did not know whether it was late or early. The candles had all
burned out. Dolly had just been in the study and had suggested to the
doctor that he should lie down. Levin sat listening to the doctor’s
stories of a quack mesmerizer and looking at the ashes of his
cigarette. There had been a period of repose, and he had sunk into
oblivion. He had completely forgotten what was going on now. He heard
the doctor’s chat and understood it. Suddenly there came an unearthly
shriek. The shriek was so awful that Levin did not even jump up, but
holding his breath, gazed in terrified inquiry at the doctor. The
doctor put his head on one side, listened, and smiled approvingly.
Everything was so extraordinary that nothing could strike Levin as
strange. “I suppose it must be so,” he thought, and still sat where he
was. Whose scream was this? He jumped up, ran on tiptoe to the bedroom,
edged round Lizaveta Petrovna and the princess, and took up his
position at Kitty’s pillow. The scream had subsided, but there was some
change now. What it was he did not see and did not comprehend, and he
had no wish to see or comprehend. But he saw it by the face of Lizaveta
Petrovna. Lizaveta Petrovna’s face was stern and pale, and still as
resolute, though her jaws were twitching, and her eyes were fixed
intently on Kitty. Kitty’s swollen and agonized face, a tress of hair
clinging to her moist brow, was turned to him and sought his eyes. Her
lifted hands asked for his hands. Clutching his chill hands in her
moist ones, she began squeezing them to her face.

“Don’t go, don’t go! I’m not afraid, I’m not afraid!” she said rapidly.
“Mamma, take my earrings. They bother me. You’re not afraid? Quick,
quick, Lizaveta Petrovna....”

She spoke quickly, very quickly, and tried to smile. But suddenly her
face was drawn, she pushed him away.

“Oh, this is awful! I’m dying, I’m dying! Go away!” she shrieked, and
again he heard that unearthly scream.

Levin clutched at his head and ran out of the room.

“It’s nothing, it’s nothing, it’s all right,” Dolly called after him.

But they might say what they liked, he knew now that all was over. He
stood in the next room, his head leaning against the door post, and
heard shrieks, howls such as he had never heard before, and he knew
that what had been Kitty was uttering these shrieks. He had long ago
ceased to wish for the child. By now he loathed this child. He did not
even wish for her life now, all he longed for was the end of this awful
anguish.

“Doctor! What is it? What is it? By God!” he said, snatching at the
doctor’s hand as he came up.

“It’s the end,” said the doctor. And the doctor’s face was so grave as
he said it that Levin took _the end_ as meaning her death.

Beside himself, he ran into the bedroom. The first thing he saw was the
face of Lizaveta Petrovna. It was even more frowning and stern. Kitty’s
face he did not know. In the place where it had been was something that
was fearful in its strained distortion and in the sounds that came from
it. He fell down with his head on the wooden framework of the bed,
feeling that his heart was bursting. The awful scream never paused, it
became still more awful, and as though it had reached the utmost limit
of terror, suddenly it ceased. Levin could not believe his ears, but
there could be no doubt; the scream had ceased and he heard a subdued
stir and bustle, and hurried breathing, and her voice, gasping, alive,
tender, and blissful, uttered softly, “It’s over!”

He lifted his head. With her hands hanging exhausted on the quilt,
looking extraordinarily lovely and serene, she looked at him in silence
and tried to smile, and could not.

And suddenly, from the mysterious and awful far-away world in which he
had been living for the last twenty-two hours, Levin felt himself all
in an instant borne back to the old every-day world, glorified though
now, by such a radiance of happiness that he could not bear it. The
strained chords snapped, sobs and tears of joy which he had never
foreseen rose up with such violence that his whole body shook, that for
long they prevented him from speaking.

Falling on his knees before the bed, he held his wife’s hand before his
lips and kissed it, and the hand, with a weak movement of the fingers,
responded to his kiss. And meanwhile, there at the foot of the bed, in
the deft hands of Lizaveta Petrovna, like a flickering light in a lamp,
lay the life of a human creature, which had never existed before, and
which would now with the same right, with the same importance to
itself, live and create in its own image.

“Alive! alive! And a boy too! Set your mind at rest!” Levin heard
Lizaveta Petrovna saying, as she slapped the baby’s back with a shaking
hand.

“Mamma, is it true?” said Kitty’s voice.

The princess’s sobs were all the answers she could make. And in the
midst of the silence there came in unmistakable reply to the mother’s
question, a voice quite unlike the subdued voices speaking in the room.
It was the bold, clamorous, self-assertive squall of the new human
being, who had so incomprehensibly appeared.

If Levin had been told before that Kitty was dead, and that he had died
with her, and that their children were angels, and that God was
standing before him, he would have been surprised at nothing. But now,
coming back to the world of reality, he had to make great mental
efforts to take in that she was alive and well, and that the creature
squalling so desperately was his son. Kitty was alive, her agony was
over. And he was unutterably happy. That he understood; he was
completely happy in it. But the baby? Whence, why, who was he?... He
could not get used to the idea. It seemed to him something extraneous,
superfluous, to which he could not accustom himself.


Chapter 16

At ten o’clock the old prince, Sergey Ivanovitch, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch were sitting at Levin’s. Having inquired after Kitty, they
had dropped into conversation upon other subjects. Levin heard them,
and unconsciously, as they talked, going over the past, over what had
been up to that morning, he thought of himself as he had been yesterday
till that point. It was as though a hundred years had passed since
then. He felt himself exalted to unattainable heights, from which he
studiously lowered himself so as not to wound the people he was talking
to. He talked, and was all the time thinking of his wife, of her
condition now, of his son, in whose existence he tried to school
himself into believing. The whole world of woman, which had taken for
him since his marriage a new value he had never suspected before, was
now so exalted that he could not take it in in his imagination. He
heard them talk of yesterday’s dinner at the club, and thought: “What
is happening with her now? Is she asleep? How is she? What is she
thinking of? Is he crying, my son Dmitri?” And in the middle of the
conversation, in the middle of a sentence, he jumped up and went out of
the room.

“Send me word if I can see her,” said the prince.

“Very well, in a minute,” answered Levin, and without stopping, he went
to her room.

She was not asleep, she was talking gently with her mother, making
plans about the christening.

Carefully set to rights, with hair well-brushed, in a smart little cap
with some blue in it, her arms out on the quilt, she was lying on her
back. Meeting his eyes, her eyes drew him to her. Her face, bright
before, brightened still more as he drew near her. There was the same
change in it from earthly to unearthly that is seen in the face of the
dead. But then it means farewell, here it meant welcome. Again a rush
of emotion, such as he had felt at the moment of the child’s birth,
flooded his heart. She took his hand and asked him if he had slept. He
could not answer, and turned away, struggling with his weakness.

“I have had a nap, Kostya!” she said to him; “and I am so comfortable
now.”

She looked at him, but suddenly her expression changed.

“Give him to me,” she said, hearing the baby’s cry. “Give him to me,
Lizaveta Petrovna, and he shall look at him.”

“To be sure, his papa shall look at him,” said Lizaveta Petrovna,
getting up and bringing something red, and queer, and wriggling. “Wait
a minute, we’ll make him tidy first,” and Lizaveta Petrovna laid the
red wobbling thing on the bed, began untrussing and trussing up the
baby, lifting it up and turning it over with one finger and powdering
it with something.

Levin, looking at the tiny, pitiful creature, made strenuous efforts to
discover in his heart some traces of fatherly feeling for it. He felt
nothing towards it but disgust. But when it was undressed and he caught
a glimpse of wee, wee, little hands, little feet, saffron-colored, with
little toes, too, and positively with a little big toe different from
the rest, and when he saw Lizaveta Petrovna closing the wide-open
little hands, as though they were soft springs, and putting them into
linen garments, such pity for the little creature came upon him, and
such terror that she would hurt it, that he held her hand back.

Lizaveta Petrovna laughed.

“Don’t be frightened, don’t be frightened!”

When the baby had been put to rights and transformed into a firm doll,
Lizaveta Petrovna dandled it as though proud of her handiwork, and
stood a little away so that Levin might see his son in all his glory.

Kitty looked sideways in the same direction, never taking her eyes off
the baby. “Give him to me! give him to me!” she said, and even made as
though she would sit up.

“What are you thinking of, Katerina Alexandrovna, you mustn’t move like
that! Wait a minute. I’ll give him to you. Here we’re showing papa what
a fine fellow we are!”

And Lizaveta Petrovna, with one hand supporting the wobbling head,
lifted up on the other arm the strange, limp, red creature, whose head
was lost in its swaddling clothes. But it had a nose, too, and slanting
eyes and smacking lips.

“A splendid baby!” said Lizaveta Petrovna.

Levin sighed with mortification. This splendid baby excited in him no
feeling but disgust and compassion. It was not at all the feeling he
had looked forward to.

He turned away while Lizaveta Petrovna put the baby to the unaccustomed
breast.

Suddenly laughter made him look round. The baby had taken the breast.

“Come, that’s enough, that’s enough!” said Lizaveta Petrovna, but Kitty
would not let the baby go. He fell asleep in her arms.

“Look, now,” said Kitty, turning the baby so that he could see it. The
aged-looking little face suddenly puckered up still more and the baby
sneezed.

Smiling, hardly able to restrain his tears, Levin kissed his wife and
went out of the dark room. What he felt towards this little creature
was utterly unlike what he had expected. There was nothing cheerful and
joyous in the feeling; on the contrary, it was a new torture of
apprehension. It was the consciousness of a new sphere of liability to
pain. And this sense was so painful at first, the apprehension lest
this helpless creature should suffer was so intense, that it prevented
him from noticing the strange thrill of senseless joy and even pride
that he had felt when the baby sneezed.


Chapter 17

Stepan Arkadyevitch’s affairs were in a very bad way.

The money for two-thirds of the forest had all been spent already, and
he had borrowed from the merchant in advance at ten per cent discount,
almost all the remaining third. The merchant would not give more,
especially as Darya Alexandrovna, for the first time that winter
insisting on her right to her own property, had refused to sign the
receipt for the payment of the last third of the forest. All his salary
went on household expenses and in payment of petty debts that could not
be put off. There was positively no money.

This was unpleasant and awkward, and in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s opinion
things could not go on like this. The explanation of the position was,
in his view, to be found in the fact that his salary was too small. The
post he filled had been unmistakably very good five years ago, but it
was so no longer.

Petrov, the bank director, had twelve thousand; Sventitsky, a company
director, had seventeen thousand; Mitin, who had founded a bank,
received fifty thousand.

“Clearly I’ve been napping, and they’ve overlooked me,” Stepan
Arkadyevitch thought about himself. And he began keeping his eyes and
ears open, and towards the end of the winter he had discovered a very
good berth and had formed a plan of attack upon it, at first from
Moscow through aunts, uncles, and friends, and then, when the matter
was well advanced, in the spring, he went himself to Petersburg. It was
one of those snug, lucrative berths of which there are so many more
nowadays than there used to be, with incomes ranging from one thousand
to fifty thousand roubles. It was the post of secretary of the
committee of the amalgamated agency of the southern railways, and of
certain banking companies. This position, like all such appointments,
called for such immense energy and such varied qualifications, that it
was difficult for them to be found united in any one man. And since a
man combining all the qualifications was not to be found, it was at
least better that the post be filled by an honest than by a dishonest
man. And Stepan Arkadyevitch was not merely an honest
man—unemphatically—in the common acceptation of the words, he was an
honest man—emphatically—in that special sense which the word has in
Moscow, when they talk of an “honest” politician, an “honest” writer,
an “honest” newspaper, an “honest” institution, an “honest” tendency,
meaning not simply that the man or the institution is not dishonest,
but that they are capable on occasion of taking a line of their own in
opposition to the authorities.

Stepan Arkadyevitch moved in those circles in Moscow in which that
expression had come into use, was regarded there as an honest man, and
so had more right to this appointment than others.

The appointment yielded an income of from seven to ten thousand a year,
and Oblonsky could fill it without giving up his government position.
It was in the hands of two ministers, one lady, and two Jews, and all
these people, though the way had been paved already with them, Stepan
Arkadyevitch had to see in Petersburg. Besides this business, Stepan
Arkadyevitch had promised his sister Anna to obtain from Karenin a
definite answer on the question of divorce. And begging fifty roubles
from Dolly, he set off for Petersburg.

Stepan Arkadyevitch sat in Karenin’s study listening to his report on
the causes of the unsatisfactory position of Russian finance, and only
waiting for the moment when he would finish to speak about his own
business or about Anna.

“Yes, that’s very true,” he said, when Alexey Alexandrovitch took off
the pince-nez, without which he could not read now, and looked
inquiringly at his former brother-in-law, “that’s very true in
particular cases, but still the principle of our day is freedom.”

“Yes, but I lay down another principle, embracing the principle of
freedom,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, with emphasis on the word
“embracing,” and he put on his pince-nez again, so as to read the
passage in which this statement was made. And turning over the
beautifully written, wide-margined manuscript, Alexey Alexandrovitch
read aloud over again the conclusive passage.

“I don’t advocate protection for the sake of private interests, but for
the public weal, and for the lower and upper classes equally,” he said,
looking over his pince-nez at Oblonsky. “But _they_ cannot grasp that,
_they_ are taken up now with personal interests, and carried away by
phrases.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch knew that when Karenin began to talk of what _they_
were doing and thinking, the persons who would not accept his report
and were the cause of everything wrong in Russia, that it was coming
near the end. And so now he eagerly abandoned the principle of
free-trade, and fully agreed. Alexey Alexandrovitch paused,
thoughtfully turning over the pages of his manuscript.

“Oh, by the way,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, “I wanted to ask you, some
time when you see Pomorsky, to drop him a hint that I should be very
glad to get that new appointment of secretary of the committee of the
amalgamated agency of the southern railways and banking companies.”
Stepan Arkadyevitch was familiar by now with the title of the post he
coveted, and he brought it out rapidly without mistake.

Alexey Alexandrovitch questioned him as to the duties of this new
committee, and pondered. He was considering whether the new committee
would not be acting in some way contrary to the views he had been
advocating. But as the influence of the new committee was of a very
complex nature, and his views were of very wide application, he could
not decide this straight off, and taking off his pince-nez, he said:

“Of course, I can mention it to him; but what is your reason precisely
for wishing to obtain the appointment?”

“It’s a good salary, rising to nine thousand, and my means....”

“Nine thousand!” repeated Alexey Alexandrovitch, and he frowned. The
high figure of the salary made him reflect that on that side Stepan
Arkadyevitch’s proposed position ran counter to the main tendency of
his own projects of reform, which always leaned towards economy.

“I consider, and I have embodied my views in a note on the subject,
that in our day these immense salaries are evidence of the unsound
economic _assiette_ of our finances.”

“But what’s to be done?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Suppose a bank
director gets ten thousand—well, he’s worth it; or an engineer gets
twenty thousand—after all, it’s a growing thing, you know!”

“I assume that a salary is the price paid for a commodity, and it ought
to conform with the law of supply and demand. If the salary is fixed
without any regard for that law, as, for instance, when I see two
engineers leaving college together, both equally well trained and
efficient, and one getting forty thousand while the other is satisfied
with two; or when I see lawyers and hussars, having no special
qualifications, appointed directors of banking companies with immense
salaries, I conclude that the salary is not fixed in accordance with
the law of supply and demand, but simply through personal interest. And
this is an abuse of great gravity in itself, and one that reacts
injuriously on the government service. I consider....”

Stepan Arkadyevitch made haste to interrupt his brother-in-law.

“Yes; but you must agree that it’s a new institution of undoubted
utility that’s being started. After all, you know, it’s a growing
thing! What they lay particular stress on is the thing being carried on
honestly,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with emphasis.

But the Moscow significance of the word “honest” was lost on Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

“Honesty is only a negative qualification,” he said.

“Well, you’ll do me a great service, anyway,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
“by putting in a word to Pomorsky—just in the way of conversation....”

“But I fancy it’s more in Volgarinov’s hands,” said Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

“Volgarinov has fully assented, as far as he’s concerned,” said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, turning red. Stepan Arkadyevitch reddened at the mention
of that name, because he had been that morning at the Jew Volgarinov’s,
and the visit had left an unpleasant recollection.

Stepan Arkadyevitch believed most positively that the committee in
which he was trying to get an appointment was a new, genuine, and
honest public body, but that morning when Volgarinov had—intentionally,
beyond a doubt—kept him two hours waiting with other petitioners in his
waiting room, he had suddenly felt uneasy.

Whether he was uncomfortable that he, a descendant of Rurik, Prince
Oblonsky, had been kept for two hours waiting to see a Jew, or that for
the first time in his life he was not following the example of his
ancestors in serving the government, but was turning off into a new
career, anyway he was very uncomfortable. During those two hours in
Volgarinov’s waiting room Stepan Arkadyevitch, stepping jauntily about
the room, pulling his whiskers, entering into conversation with the
other petitioners, and inventing an epigram on his position,
assiduously concealed from others, and even from himself, the feeling
he was experiencing.

But all the time he was uncomfortable and angry, he could not have said
why—whether because he could not get his epigram just right, or from
some other reason. When at last Volgarinov had received him with
exaggerated politeness and unmistakable triumph at his humiliation, and
had all but refused the favor asked of him, Stepan Arkadyevitch had
made haste to forget it all as soon as possible. And now, at the mere
recollection, he blushed.


Chapter 18

“Now there is something I want to talk about, and you know what it is.
About Anna,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said, pausing for a brief space, and
shaking off the unpleasant impression.

As soon as Oblonsky uttered Anna’s name, the face of Alexey
Alexandrovitch was completely transformed; all the life was gone out of
it, and it looked weary and dead.

“What is it exactly that you want from me?” he said, moving in his
chair and snapping his pince-nez.

“A definite settlement, Alexey Alexandrovitch, some settlement of the
position. I’m appealing to you” (“not as an injured husband,” Stepan
Arkadyevitch was going to say, but afraid of wrecking his negotiation
by this, he changed the words) “not as a statesman” (which did not
sound _à propos_), “but simply as a man, and a good-hearted man and a
Christian. You must have pity on her,” he said.

“That is, in what way precisely?” Karenin said softly.

“Yes, pity on her. If you had seen her as I have!—I have been spending
all the winter with her—you would have pity on her. Her position is
awful, simply awful!”

“I had imagined,” answered Alexey Alexandrovitch in a higher, almost
shrill voice, “that Anna Arkadyevna had everything she had desired for
herself.”

“Oh, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for heaven’s sake, don’t let us indulge in
recriminations! What is past is past, and you know what she wants and
is waiting for—divorce.”

“But I believe Anna Arkadyevna refuses a divorce, if I make it a
condition to leave me my son. I replied in that sense, and supposed
that the matter was ended. I consider it at an end,” shrieked Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

“But, for heaven’s sake, don’t get hot!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
touching his brother-in-law’s knee. “The matter is not ended. If you
will allow me to recapitulate, it was like this: when you parted, you
were as magnanimous as could possibly be; you were ready to give her
everything—freedom, divorce even. She appreciated that. No, don’t think
that. She did appreciate it—to such a degree that at the first moment,
feeling how she had wronged you, she did not consider and could not
consider everything. She gave up everything. But experience, time, have
shown that her position is unbearable, impossible.”

“The life of Anna Arkadyevna can have no interest for me,” Alexey
Alexandrovitch put in, lifting his eyebrows.

“Allow me to disbelieve that,” Stepan Arkadyevitch replied gently. “Her
position is intolerable for her, and of no benefit to anyone whatever.
She has deserved it, you will say. She knows that and asks you for
nothing; she says plainly that she dare not ask you. But I, all of us,
her relatives, all who love her, beg you, entreat you. Why should she
suffer? Who is any the better for it?”

“Excuse me, you seem to put me in the position of the guilty party,”
observed Alexey Alexandrovitch.

“Oh, no, oh, no, not at all! please understand me,” said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, touching his hand again, as though feeling sure this
physical contact would soften his brother-in-law. “All I say is this:
her position is intolerable, and it might be alleviated by you, and you
will lose nothing by it. I will arrange it all for you, so that you’ll
not notice it. You did promise it, you know.”

“The promise was given before. And I had supposed that the question of
my son had settled the matter. Besides, I had hoped that Anna
Arkadyevna had enough generosity....” Alexey Alexandrovitch articulated
with difficulty, his lips twitching and his face white.

“She leaves it all to your generosity. She begs, she implores one thing
of you—to extricate her from the impossible position in which she is
placed. She does not ask for her son now. Alexey Alexandrovitch, you
are a good man. Put yourself in her position for a minute. The question
of divorce for her in her position is a question of life and death. If
you had not promised it once, she would have reconciled herself to her
position, she would have gone on living in the country. But you
promised it, and she wrote to you, and moved to Moscow. And here she’s
been for six months in Moscow, where every chance meeting cuts her to
the heart, every day expecting an answer. Why, it’s like keeping a
condemned criminal for six months with the rope round his neck,
promising him perhaps death, perhaps mercy. Have pity on her, and I
will undertake to arrange everything. _Vos scrupules_....”

“I am not talking about that, about that....” Alexey Alexandrovitch
interrupted with disgust. “But, perhaps, I promised what I had no right
to promise.”

“So you go back from your promise?”

“I have never refused to do all that is possible, but I want time to
consider how much of what I promised is possible.”

“No, Alexey Alexandrovitch!” cried Oblonsky, jumping up, “I won’t
believe that! She’s unhappy as only an unhappy woman can be, and you
cannot refuse in such....”

“As much of what I promised as is possible. _Vous professez d’être
libre penseur._ But I as a believer cannot, in a matter of such
gravity, act in opposition to the Christian law.”

“But in Christian societies and among us, as far as I’m aware, divorce
is allowed,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Divorce is sanctioned even by
our church. And we see....”

“It is allowed, but not in the sense....”

“Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are not like yourself,” said Oblonsky,
after a brief pause. “Wasn’t it you (and didn’t we all appreciate it in
you?) who forgave everything, and moved simply by Christian feeling was
ready to make any sacrifice? You said yourself: if a man take thy coat,
give him thy cloak also, and now....”

“I beg,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch shrilly, getting suddenly onto his
feet, his face white and his jaws twitching, “I beg you to drop this
... to drop ... this subject!”

“Oh, no! Oh, forgive me, forgive me if I have wounded you,” said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, holding out his hand with a smile of embarrassment; “but
like a messenger I have simply performed the commission given me.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch gave him his hand, pondered a little, and said:

“I must think it over and seek for guidance. The day after tomorrow I
will give you a final answer,” he said, after considering a moment.


Chapter 19

Stepan Arkadyevitch was about to go away when Korney came in to
announce:

“Sergey Alexyevitch!”

“Who’s Sergey Alexyevitch?” Stepan Arkadyevitch was beginning, but he
remembered immediately.

“Ah, Seryozha!” he said aloud. “Sergey Alexyevitch! I thought it was
the director of a department. Anna asked me to see him too,” he
thought.

And he recalled the timid, piteous expression with which Anna had said
to him at parting: “Anyway, you will see him. Find out exactly where he
is, who is looking after him. And Stiva ... if it were possible! Could
it be possible?” Stepan Arkadyevitch knew what was meant by that “if it
were possible,”—if it were possible to arrange the divorce so as to let
her have her son.... Stepan Arkadyevitch saw now that it was no good to
dream of that, but still he was glad to see his nephew.

Alexey Alexandrovitch reminded his brother-in-law that they never spoke
to the boy of his mother, and he begged him not to mention a single
word about her.

“He was very ill after that interview with his mother, which we had not
foreseen,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch. “Indeed, we feared for his life.
But with rational treatment, and sea-bathing in the summer, he regained
his strength, and now, by the doctor’s advice, I have let him go to
school. And certainly the companionship of school has had a good effect
on him, and he is perfectly well, and making good progress.”

“What a fine fellow he’s grown! He’s not Seryozha now, but quite
full-fledged Sergey Alexyevitch!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling, as
he looked at the handsome, broad-shouldered lad in blue coat and long
trousers, who walked in alertly and confidently. The boy looked healthy
and good-humored. He bowed to his uncle as to a stranger, but
recognizing him, he blushed and turned hurriedly away from him, as
though offended and irritated at something. The boy went up to his
father and handed him a note of the marks he had gained in school.

“Well, that’s very fair,” said his father, “you can go.”

“He’s thinner and taller, and has grown out of being a child into a
boy; I like that,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Do you remember me?”

The boy looked back quickly at his uncle.

“Yes, _mon oncle_,” he answered, glancing at his father, and again he
looked downcast.

His uncle called him to him, and took his hand.

“Well, and how are you getting on?” he said, wanting to talk to him,
and not knowing what to say.

The boy, blushing and making no answer, cautiously drew his hand away.
As soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch let go his hand, he glanced doubtfully
at his father, and like a bird set free, he darted out of the room.

A year had passed since the last time Seryozha had seen his mother.
Since then he had heard nothing more of her. And in the course of that
year he had gone to school, and made friends among his schoolfellows.
The dreams and memories of his mother, which had made him ill after
seeing her, did not occupy his thoughts now. When they came back to
him, he studiously drove them away, regarding them as shameful and
girlish, below the dignity of a boy and a schoolboy. He knew that his
father and mother were separated by some quarrel, he knew that he had
to remain with his father, and he tried to get used to that idea.

He disliked seeing his uncle, so like his mother, for it called up
those memories of which he was ashamed. He disliked it all the more as
from some words he had caught as he waited at the study door, and still
more from the faces of his father and uncle, he guessed that they must
have been talking of his mother. And to avoid condemning the father
with whom he lived and on whom he was dependent, and, above all, to
avoid giving way to sentimentality, which he considered so degrading,
Seryozha tried not to look at his uncle who had come to disturb his
peace of mind, and not to think of what he recalled to him.

But when Stepan Arkadyevitch, going out after him, saw him on the
stairs, and calling to him, asked him how he spent his playtime at
school, Seryozha talked more freely to him away from his father’s
presence.

“We have a railway now,” he said in answer to his uncle’s question.
“It’s like this, do you see: two sit on a bench—they’re the passengers;
and one stands up straight on the bench. And all are harnessed to it by
their arms or by their belts, and they run through all the rooms—the
doors are left open beforehand. Well, and it’s pretty hard work being
the conductor!”

“That’s the one that stands?” Stepan Arkadyevitch inquired, smiling.

“Yes, you want pluck for it, and cleverness too, especially when they
stop all of a sudden, or someone falls down.”

“Yes, that must be a serious matter,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
watching with mournful interest the eager eyes, like his mother’s; not
childish now—no longer fully innocent. And though he had promised
Alexey Alexandrovitch not to speak of Anna, he could not restrain
himself.

“Do you remember your mother?” he asked suddenly.

“No, I don’t,” Seryozha said quickly. He blushed crimson, and his face
clouded over. And his uncle could get nothing more out of him. His
tutor found his pupil on the staircase half an hour later, and for a
long while he could not make out whether he was ill-tempered or crying.

“What is it? I expect you hurt yourself when you fell down?” said the
tutor. “I told you it was a dangerous game. And we shall have to speak
to the director.”

“If I had hurt myself, nobody should have found it out, that’s
certain.”

“Well, what is it, then?”

“Leave me alone! If I remember, or if I don’t remember?... what
business is it of his? Why should I remember? Leave me in peace!” he
said, addressing not his tutor, but the whole world.


Chapter 20

Stepan Arkadyevitch, as usual, did not waste his time in Petersburg. In
Petersburg, besides business, his sister’s divorce, and his coveted
appointment, he wanted, as he always did, to freshen himself up, as he
said, after the mustiness of Moscow.

In spite of its _cafés chantants_ and its omnibuses, Moscow was yet a
stagnant bog. Stepan Arkadyevitch always felt it. After living for some
time in Moscow, especially in close relations with his family, he was
conscious of a depression of spirits. After being a long time in Moscow
without a change, he reached a point when he positively began to be
worrying himself over his wife’s ill-humor and reproaches, over his
children’s health and education, and the petty details of his official
work; even the fact of being in debt worried him. But he had only to go
and stay a little while in Petersburg, in the circle there in which he
moved, where people lived—really lived—instead of vegetating as in
Moscow, and all such ideas vanished and melted away at once, like wax
before the fire. His wife?... Only that day he had been talking to
Prince Tchetchensky. Prince Tchetchensky had a wife and family,
grown-up pages in the corps, ... and he had another illegitimate family
of children also. Though the first family was very nice too, Prince
Tchetchensky felt happier in his second family; and he used to take his
eldest son with him to his second family, and told Stepan Arkadyevitch
that he thought it good for his son, enlarging his ideas. What would
have been said to that in Moscow?

His children? In Petersburg children did not prevent their parents from
enjoying life. The children were brought up in schools, and there was
no trace of the wild idea that prevailed in Moscow, in Lvov’s
household, for instance, that all the luxuries of life were for the
children, while the parents have nothing but work and anxiety. Here
people understood that a man is in duty bound to live for himself, as
every man of culture should live.

His official duties? Official work here was not the stiff, hopeless
drudgery that it was in Moscow. Here there was some interest in
official life. A chance meeting, a service rendered, a happy phrase, a
knack of facetious mimicry, and a man’s career might be made in a
trice. So it had been with Bryantsev, whom Stepan Arkadyevitch had met
the previous day, and who was one of the highest functionaries in
government now. There was some interest in official work like that.

The Petersburg attitude on pecuniary matters had an especially soothing
effect on Stepan Arkadyevitch. Bartnyansky, who must spend at least
fifty thousand to judge by the style he lived in, had made an
interesting comment the day before on that subject.

As they were talking before dinner, Stepan Arkadyevitch said to
Bartnyansky:

“You’re friendly, I fancy, with Mordvinsky; you might do me a favor:
say a word to him, please, for me. There’s an appointment I should like
to get—secretary of the agency....”

“Oh, I shan’t remember all that, if you tell it to me.... But what
possesses you to have to do with railways and Jews?... Take it as you
will, it’s a low business.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch did not say to Bartnyansky that it was a “growing
thing”—Bartnyansky would not have understood that.

“I want the money, I’ve nothing to live on.”

“You’re living, aren’t you?”

“Yes, but in debt.”

“Are you, though? Heavily?” said Bartnyansky sympathetically.

“Very heavily: twenty thousand.”

Bartnyansky broke into good-humored laughter.

“Oh, lucky fellow!” said he. “My debts mount up to a million and a
half, and I’ve nothing, and still I can live, as you see!”

And Stepan Arkadyevitch saw the correctness of this view not in words
only but in actual fact. Zhivahov owed three hundred thousand, and
hadn’t a farthing to bless himself with, and he lived, and in style
too! Count Krivtsov was considered a hopeless case by everyone, and yet
he kept two mistresses. Petrovsky had run through five millions, and
still lived in just the same style, and was even a manager in the
financial department with a salary of twenty thousand. But besides
this, Petersburg had physically an agreeable effect on Stepan
Arkadyevitch. It made him younger. In Moscow he sometimes found a gray
hair in his head, dropped asleep after dinner, stretched, walked slowly
upstairs, breathing heavily, was bored by the society of young women,
and did not dance at balls. In Petersburg he always felt ten years
younger.

His experience in Petersburg was exactly what had been described to him
on the previous day by Prince Pyotr Oblonsky, a man of sixty, who had
just come back from abroad:

“We don’t know the way to live here,” said Pyotr Oblonsky. “I spent the
summer in Baden, and you wouldn’t believe it, I felt quite a young man.
At a glimpse of a pretty woman, my thoughts.... One dines and drinks a
glass of wine, and feels strong and ready for anything. I came home to
Russia—had to see my wife, and, what’s more, go to my country place;
and there, you’d hardly believe it, in a fortnight I’d got into a
dressing gown and given up dressing for dinner. Needn’t say I had no
thoughts left for pretty women. I became quite an old gentleman. There
was nothing left for me but to think of my eternal salvation. I went
off to Paris—I was as right as could be at once.”

Stepan Arkadyevitch felt exactly the difference that Pyotr Oblonsky
described. In Moscow he degenerated so much that if he had had to be
there for long together, he might in good earnest have come to
considering his salvation; in Petersburg he felt himself a man of the
world again.

Between Princess Betsy Tverskaya and Stepan Arkadyevitch there had long
existed rather curious relations. Stepan Arkadyevitch always flirted
with her in jest, and used to say to her, also in jest, the most
unseemly things, knowing that nothing delighted her so much. The day
after his conversation with Karenin, Stepan Arkadyevitch went to see
her, and felt so youthful that in this jesting flirtation and nonsense
he recklessly went so far that he did not know how to extricate
himself, as unluckily he was so far from being attracted by her that he
thought her positively disagreeable. What made it hard to change the
conversation was the fact that he was very attractive to her. So that
he was considerably relieved at the arrival of Princess Myakaya, which
cut short their _tête-à-tête_.

“Ah, so you’re here!” said she when she saw him. “Well, and what news
of your poor sister? You needn’t look at me like that,” she added.
“Ever since they’ve all turned against her, all those who’re a thousand
times worse than she, I’ve thought she did a very fine thing. I can’t
forgive Vronsky for not letting me know when she was in Petersburg. I’d
have gone to see her and gone about with her everywhere. Please give
her my love. Come, tell me about her.”

“Yes, her position is very difficult; she....” began Stepan
Arkadyevitch, in the simplicity of his heart accepting as sterling coin
Princess Myakaya’s words “tell me about her.” Princess Myakaya
interrupted him immediately, as she always did, and began talking
herself.

“She’s done what they all do, except me—only they hide it. But she
wouldn’t be deceitful, and she did a fine thing. And she did better
still in throwing up that crazy brother-in-law of yours. You must
excuse me. Everybody used to say he was so clever, so very clever; I
was the only one that said he was a fool. Now that he’s so thick with
Lidia Ivanovna and Landau, they all say he’s crazy, and I should prefer
not to agree with everybody, but this time I can’t help it.”

“Oh, do please explain,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch; “what does it mean?
Yesterday I was seeing him on my sister’s behalf, and I asked him to
give me a final answer. He gave me no answer, and said he would think
it over. But this morning, instead of an answer, I received an
invitation from Countess Lidia Ivanovna for this evening.”

“Ah, so that’s it, that’s it!” said Princess Myakaya gleefully,
“they’re going to ask Landau what he’s to say.”

“Ask Landau? What for? Who or what’s Landau?”

“What! you don’t know Jules Landau, _le fameux Jules Landau, le
clairvoyant_? He’s crazy too, but on him your sister’s fate depends.
See what comes of living in the provinces—you know nothing about
anything. Landau, do you see, was a _commis_ in a shop in Paris, and he
went to a doctor’s; and in the doctor’s waiting room he fell asleep,
and in his sleep he began giving advice to all the patients. And
wonderful advice it was! Then the wife of Yury Meledinsky—you know, the
invalid?—heard of this Landau, and had him to see her husband. And he
cured her husband, though I can’t say that I see he did him much good,
for he’s just as feeble a creature as ever he was, but they believed in
him, and took him along with them and brought him to Russia. Here
there’s been a general rush to him, and he’s begun doctoring everyone.
He cured Countess Bezzubova, and she took such a fancy to him that she
adopted him.”

“Adopted him?”

“Yes, as her son. He’s not Landau any more now, but Count Bezzubov.
That’s neither here nor there, though; but Lidia—I’m very fond of her,
but she has a screw loose somewhere—has lost her heart to this Landau
now, and nothing is settled now in her house or Alexey Alexandrovitch’s
without him, and so your sister’s fate is now in the hands of Landau,
_alias_ Count Bezzubov.”


Chapter 21

After a capital dinner and a great deal of cognac drunk at
Bartnyansky’s, Stepan Arkadyevitch, only a little later than the
appointed time, went in to Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s.

“Who else is with the countess?—a Frenchman?” Stepan Arkadyevitch asked
the hall-porter, as he glanced at the familiar overcoat of Alexey
Alexandrovitch and a queer, rather artless-looking overcoat with
clasps.

“Alexey Alexandrovitch Karenin and Count Bezzubov,” the porter answered
severely.

“Princess Myakaya guessed right,” thought Stepan Arkadyevitch, as he
went upstairs. “Curious! It would be quite as well, though, to get on
friendly terms with her. She has immense influence. If she would say a
word to Pomorsky, the thing would be a certainty.”

It was still quite light out-of-doors, but in Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s
little drawing-room the blinds were drawn and the lamps lighted. At a
round table under a lamp sat the countess and Alexey Alexandrovitch,
talking softly. A short, thinnish man, very pale and handsome, with
feminine hips and knock-kneed legs, with fine brilliant eyes and long
hair lying on the collar of his coat, was standing at the end of the
room gazing at the portraits on the wall. After greeting the lady of
the house and Alexey Alexandrovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch could not
resist glancing once more at the unknown man.

“Monsieur Landau!” the countess addressed him with a softness and
caution that impressed Oblonsky. And she introduced them.

Landau looked round hurriedly, came up, and smiling, laid his moist,
lifeless hand in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s outstretched hand and
immediately walked away and fell to gazing at the portraits again. The
countess and Alexey Alexandrovitch looked at each other significantly.

“I am very glad to see you, particularly today,” said Countess Lidia
Ivanovna, pointing Stepan Arkadyevitch to a seat beside Karenin.

“I introduced you to him as Landau,” she said in a soft voice, glancing
at the Frenchman and again immediately after at Alexey Alexandrovitch,
“but he is really Count Bezzubov, as you’re probably aware. Only he
does not like the title.”

“Yes, I heard so,” answered Stepan Arkadyevitch; “they say he
completely cured Countess Bezzubova.”

“She was here today, poor thing!” the countess said, turning to Alexey
Alexandrovitch. “This separation is awful for her. It’s such a blow to
her!”

“And he positively is going?” queried Alexey Alexandrovitch.

“Yes, he’s going to Paris. He heard a voice yesterday,” said Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, looking at Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“Ah, a voice!” repeated Oblonsky, feeling that he must be as
circumspect as he possibly could in this society, where something
peculiar was going on, or was to go on, to which he had not the key.

A moment’s silence followed, after which Countess Lidia Ivanovna, as
though approaching the main topic of conversation, said with a fine
smile to Oblonsky:

“I’ve known you for a long while, and am very glad to make a closer
acquaintance with you. _Les amis de nos amis sont nos amis._ But to be
a true friend, one must enter into the spiritual state of one’s friend,
and I fear that you are not doing so in the case of Alexey
Alexandrovitch. You understand what I mean?” she said, lifting her fine
pensive eyes.

“In part, countess, I understand the position of Alexey
Alexandrovitch....” said Oblonsky. Having no clear idea what they were
talking about, he wanted to confine himself to generalities.

“The change is not in his external position,” Countess Lidia Ivanovna
said sternly, following with eyes of love the figure of Alexey
Alexandrovitch as he got up and crossed over to Landau; “his heart is
changed, a new heart has been vouchsafed him, and I fear you don’t
fully apprehend the change that has taken place in him.”

“Oh, well, in general outlines I can conceive the change. We have
always been friendly, and now....” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, responding
with a sympathetic glance to the expression of the countess, and
mentally balancing the question with which of the two ministers she was
most intimate, so as to know about which to ask her to speak for him.

“The change that has taken place in him cannot lessen his love for his
neighbors; on the contrary, that change can only intensify love in his
heart. But I am afraid you do not understand me. Won’t you have some
tea?” she said, with her eyes indicating the footman, who was handing
round tea on a tray.

“Not quite, countess. Of course, his misfortune....”

“Yes, a misfortune which has proved the highest happiness, when his
heart was made new, was filled full of it,” she said, gazing with eyes
full of love at Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“I do believe I might ask her to speak to both of them,” thought Stepan
Arkadyevitch.

“Oh, of course, countess,” he said; “but I imagine such changes are a
matter so private that no one, even the most intimate friend, would
care to speak of them.”

“On the contrary! We ought to speak freely and help one another.”

“Yes, undoubtedly so, but there is such a difference of convictions,
and besides....” said Oblonsky with a soft smile.

“There can be no difference where it is a question of holy truth.”

“Oh, no, of course; but....” and Stepan Arkadyevitch paused in
confusion. He understood at last that they were talking of religion.

“I fancy he will fall asleep immediately,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch
in a whisper full of meaning, going up to Lidia Ivanovna.

Stepan Arkadyevitch looked round. Landau was sitting at the window,
leaning on his elbow and the back of his chair, his head drooping.
Noticing that all eyes were turned on him he raised his head and smiled
a smile of childlike artlessness.

“Don’t take any notice,” said Lidia Ivanovna, and she lightly moved a
chair up for Alexey Alexandrovitch. “I have observed....” she was
beginning, when a footman came into the room with a letter. Lidia
Ivanovna rapidly ran her eyes over the note, and excusing herself,
wrote an answer with extraordinary rapidity, handed it to the man, and
came back to the table. “I have observed,” she went on, “that Moscow
people, especially the men, are more indifferent to religion than
anyone.”

“Oh, no, countess, I thought Moscow people had the reputation of being
the firmest in the faith,” answered Stepan Arkadyevitch.

“But as far as I can make out, you are unfortunately one of the
indifferent ones,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, turning to him with a
weary smile.

“How anyone can be indifferent!” said Lidia Ivanovna.

“I am not so much indifferent on that subject as I am waiting in
suspense,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, with his most deprecating smile.
“I hardly think that the time for such questions has come yet for me.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna looked at each other.

“We can never tell whether the time has come for us or not,” said
Alexey Alexandrovitch severely. “We ought not to think whether we are
ready or not ready. God’s grace is not guided by human considerations:
sometimes it comes not to those that strive for it, and comes to those
that are unprepared, like Saul.”

“No, I believe it won’t be just yet,” said Lidia Ivanovna, who had been
meanwhile watching the movements of the Frenchman. Landau got up and
came to them.

“Do you allow me to listen?” he asked.

“Oh, yes; I did not want to disturb you,” said Lidia Ivanovna, gazing
tenderly at him; “sit here with us.”

“One has only not to close one’s eyes to shut out the light,” Alexey
Alexandrovitch went on.

“Ah, if you knew the happiness we know, feeling His presence ever in
our hearts!” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna with a rapturous smile.

“But a man may feel himself unworthy sometimes to rise to that height,”
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, conscious of hypocrisy in admitting this
religious height, but at the same time unable to bring himself to
acknowledge his free-thinking views before a person who, by a single
word to Pomorsky, might procure him the coveted appointment.

“That is, you mean that sin keeps him back?” said Lidia Ivanovna. “But
that is a false idea. There is no sin for believers, their sin has been
atoned for. _Pardon,_” she added, looking at the footman, who came in
again with another letter. She read it and gave a verbal answer:
“Tomorrow at the Grand Duchess’s, say.” “For the believer sin is not,”
she went on.

“Yes, but faith without works is dead,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
recalling the phrase from the catechism, and only by his smile clinging
to his independence.

“There you have it—from the epistle of St. James,” said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, addressing Lidia Ivanovna, with a certain
reproachfulness in his tone. It was unmistakably a subject they had
discussed more than once before. “What harm has been done by the false
interpretation of that passage! Nothing holds men back from belief like
that misinterpretation. ‘I have not works, so I cannot believe,’ though
all the while that is not said. But the very opposite is said.”

“Striving for God, saving the soul by fasting,” said Countess Lidia
Ivanovna, with disgusted contempt, “those are the crude ideas of our
monks.... Yet that is nowhere said. It is far simpler and easier,” she
added, looking at Oblonsky with the same encouraging smile with which
at court she encouraged youthful maids of honor, disconcerted by the
new surroundings of the court.

“We are saved by Christ who suffered for us. We are saved by faith,”
Alexey Alexandrovitch chimed in, with a glance of approval at her
words.

_“Vous comprenez l’anglais?”_ asked Lidia Ivanovna, and receiving a
reply in the affirmative, she got up and began looking through a shelf
of books.

“I want to read him ‘Safe and Happy,’ or ‘Under the Wing,’” she said,
looking inquiringly at Karenin. And finding the book, and sitting down
again in her place, she opened it. “It’s very short. In it is described
the way by which faith can be reached, and the happiness, above all
earthly bliss, with which it fills the soul. The believer cannot be
unhappy because he is not alone. But you will see.” She was just
settling herself to read when the footman came in again. “Madame
Borozdina? Tell her, tomorrow at two o’clock. Yes,” she said, putting
her finger in the place in the book, and gazing before her with her
fine pensive eyes, “that is how true faith acts. You know Marie Sanina?
You know about her trouble? She lost her only child. She was in
despair. And what happened? She found this comforter, and she thanks
God now for the death of her child. Such is the happiness faith
brings!”

“Oh, yes, that is most....” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, glad they were
going to read, and let him have a chance to collect his faculties. “No,
I see I’d better not ask her about anything today,” he thought. “If
only I can get out of this without putting my foot in it!”

“It will be dull for you,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, addressing
Landau; “you don’t know English, but it’s short.”

“Oh, I shall understand,” said Landau, with the same smile, and he
closed his eyes. Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna exchanged
meaningful glances, and the reading began.


Chapter 22

Stepan Arkadyevitch felt completely nonplussed by the strange talk
which he was hearing for the first time. The complexity of Petersburg,
as a rule, had a stimulating effect on him, rousing him out of his
Moscow stagnation. But he liked these complications, and understood
them only in the circles he knew and was at home in. In these
unfamiliar surroundings he was puzzled and disconcerted, and could not
get his bearings. As he listened to Countess Lidia Ivanovna, aware of
the beautiful, artless—or perhaps artful, he could not decide
which—eyes of Landau fixed upon him, Stepan Arkadyevitch began to be
conscious of a peculiar heaviness in his head.

The most incongruous ideas were in confusion in his head. “Marie Sanina
is glad her child’s dead.... How good a smoke would be now!... To be
saved, one need only believe, and the monks don’t know how the thing’s
to be done, but Countess Lidia Ivanovna does know.... And why is my
head so heavy? Is it the cognac, or all this being so queer? Anyway, I
fancy I’ve done nothing unsuitable so far. But anyway, it won’t do to
ask her now. They say they make one say one’s prayers. I only hope they
won’t make me! That’ll be too imbecile. And what stuff it is she’s
reading! but she has a good accent. Landau—Bezzubov—what’s he Bezzubov
for?” All at once Stepan Arkadyevitch became aware that his lower jaw
was uncontrollably forming a yawn. He pulled his whiskers to cover the
yawn, and shook himself together. But soon after he became aware that
he was dropping asleep and on the very point of snoring. He recovered
himself at the very moment when the voice of Countess Lidia Ivanovna
was saying “he’s asleep.” Stepan Arkadyevitch started with dismay,
feeling guilty and caught. But he was reassured at once by seeing that
the words “he’s asleep” referred not to him, but to Landau. The
Frenchman was asleep as well as Stepan Arkadyevitch. But Stepan
Arkadyevitch’s being asleep would have offended them, as he thought
(though even this, he thought, might not be so, as everything seemed so
queer), while Landau’s being asleep delighted them extremely,
especially Countess Lidia Ivanovna.

_“Mon ami,”_ said Lidia Ivanovna, carefully holding the folds of her
silk gown so as not to rustle, and in her excitement calling Karenin
not Alexey Alexandrovitch, but _“mon ami,” “donnez-lui la main. Vous
voyez?_ Sh!” she hissed at the footman as he came in again. “Not at
home.”

The Frenchman was asleep, or pretending to be asleep, with his head on
the back of his chair, and his moist hand, as it lay on his knee, made
faint movements, as though trying to catch something. Alexey
Alexandrovitch got up, tried to move carefully, but stumbled against
the table, went up and laid his hand in the Frenchman’s hand. Stepan
Arkadyevitch got up too, and opening his eyes wide, trying to wake
himself up if he were asleep, he looked first at one and then at the
other. It was all real. Stepan Arkadyevitch felt that his head was
getting worse and worse.

“_Que la personne qui est arrivée la dernière, celle qui demande,
qu’elle sorte! Qu’elle sorte!_” articulated the Frenchman, without
opening his eyes.

“_Vous m’excuserez, mais vous voyez.... Revenez vers dix heures, encore
mieux demain._”

“_Qu’elle sorte!_” repeated the Frenchman impatiently.

“_C’est moi, n’est-ce pas?_” And receiving an answer in the
affirmative, Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgetting the favor he had meant to
ask of Lidia Ivanovna, and forgetting his sister’s affairs, caring for
nothing, but filled with the sole desire to get away as soon as
possible, went out on tiptoe and ran out into the street as though from
a plague-stricken house. For a long while he chatted and joked with his
cab-driver, trying to recover his spirits.

At the French theater where he arrived for the last act, and afterwards
at the Tatar restaurant after his champagne, Stepan Arkadyevitch felt a
little refreshed in the atmosphere he was used to. But still he felt
quite unlike himself all that evening.

On getting home to Pyotr Oblonsky’s, where he was staying, Stepan
Arkadyevitch found a note from Betsy. She wrote to him that she was
very anxious to finish their interrupted conversation, and begged him
to come next day. He had scarcely read this note, and frowned at its
contents, when he heard below the ponderous tramp of the servants,
carrying something heavy.

Stepan Arkadyevitch went out to look. It was the rejuvenated Pyotr
Oblonsky. He was so drunk that he could not walk upstairs; but he told
them to set him on his legs when he saw Stepan Arkadyevitch, and
clinging to him, walked with him into his room and there began telling
him how he had spent the evening, and fell asleep doing so.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was in very low spirits, which happened rarely with
him, and for a long while he could not go to sleep. Everything he could
recall to his mind, everything was disgusting; but most disgusting of
all, as if it were something shameful, was the memory of the evening he
had spent at Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s.

Next day he received from Alexey Alexandrovitch a final answer,
refusing to grant Anna’s divorce, and he understood that this decision
was based on what the Frenchman had said in his real or pretended
trance.


Chapter 23

In order to carry through any undertaking in family life, there must
necessarily be either complete division between the husband and wife,
or loving agreement. When the relations of a couple are vacillating and
neither one thing nor the other, no sort of enterprise can be
undertaken.

Many families remain for years in the same place, though both husband
and wife are sick of it, simply because there is neither complete
division nor agreement between them.

Both Vronsky and Anna felt life in Moscow insupportable in the heat and
dust, when the spring sunshine was followed by the glare of summer, and
all the trees in the boulevards had long since been in full leaf, and
the leaves were covered with dust. But they did not go back to
Vozdvizhenskoe, as they had arranged to do long before; they went on
staying in Moscow, though they both loathed it, because of late there
had been no agreement between them.

The irritability that kept them apart had no external cause, and all
efforts to come to an understanding intensified it, instead of removing
it. It was an inner irritation, grounded in her mind on the conviction
that his love had grown less; in his, on regret that he had put himself
for her sake in a difficult position, which she, instead of lightening,
made still more difficult. Neither of them gave full utterance to their
sense of grievance, but they considered each other in the wrong, and
tried on every pretext to prove this to one another.

In her eyes the whole of him, with all his habits, ideas, desires, with
all his spiritual and physical temperament, was one thing—love for
women, and that love, she felt, ought to be entirely concentrated on
her alone. That love was less; consequently, as she reasoned, he must
have transferred part of his love to other women or to another
woman—and she was jealous. She was jealous not of any particular woman
but of the decrease of his love. Not having got an object for her
jealousy, she was on the lookout for it. At the slightest hint she
transferred her jealousy from one object to another. At one time she
was jealous of those low women with whom he might so easily renew his
old bachelor ties; then she was jealous of the society women he might
meet; then she was jealous of the imaginary girl whom he might want to
marry, for whose sake he would break with her. And this last form of
jealousy tortured her most of all, especially as he had unwarily told
her, in a moment of frankness, that his mother knew him so little that
she had had the audacity to try and persuade him to marry the young
Princess Sorokina.

And being jealous of him, Anna was indignant against him and found
grounds for indignation in everything. For everything that was
difficult in her position she blamed him. The agonizing condition of
suspense she had passed in Moscow, the tardiness and indecision of
Alexey Alexandrovitch, her solitude—she put it all down to him. If he
had loved her he would have seen all the bitterness of her position,
and would have rescued her from it. For her being in Moscow and not in
the country, he was to blame too. He could not live buried in the
country as she would have liked to do. He must have society, and he had
put her in this awful position, the bitterness of which he would not
see. And again, it was his fault that she was forever separated from
her son.

Even the rare moments of tenderness that came from time to time did not
soothe her; in his tenderness now she saw a shade of complacency, of
self-confidence, which had not been of old, and which exasperated her.

It was dusk. Anna was alone, and waiting for him to come back from a
bachelor dinner. She walked up and down in his study (the room where
the noise from the street was least heard), and thought over every
detail of their yesterday’s quarrel. Going back from the
well-remembered, offensive words of the quarrel to what had been the
ground of it, she arrived at last at its origin. For a long while she
could hardly believe that their dissension had arisen from a
conversation so inoffensive, of so little moment to either. But so it
actually had been. It all arose from his laughing at the girls’ high
schools, declaring they were useless, while she defended them. He had
spoken slightingly of women’s education in general, and had said that
Hannah, Anna’s English protégée, had not the slightest need to know
anything of physics.

This irritated Anna. She saw in this a contemptuous reference to her
occupations. And she bethought her of a phrase to pay him back for the
pain he had given her. “I don’t expect you to understand me, my
feelings, as anyone who loved me might, but simple delicacy I did
expect,” she said.

And he had actually flushed with vexation, and had said something
unpleasant. She could not recall her answer, but at that point, with an
unmistakable desire to wound her too, he had said:

“I feel no interest in your infatuation over this girl, that’s true,
because I see it’s unnatural.”

The cruelty with which he shattered the world she had built up for
herself so laboriously to enable her to endure her hard life, the
injustice with which he had accused her of affectation, of
artificiality, aroused her.

“I am very sorry that nothing but what’s coarse and material is
comprehensible and natural to you,” she said and walked out of the
room.

When he had come in to her yesterday evening, they had not referred to
the quarrel, but both felt that the quarrel had been smoothed over, but
was not at an end.

Today he had not been at home all day, and she felt so lonely and
wretched in being on bad terms with him that she wanted to forget it
all, to forgive him, and be reconciled with him; she wanted to throw
the blame on herself and to justify him.

“I am myself to blame. I’m irritable, I’m insanely jealous. I will make
it up with him, and we’ll go away to the country; there I shall be more
at peace.”

“Unnatural!” She suddenly recalled the word that had stung her most of
all, not so much the word itself as the intent to wound her with which
it was said. “I know what he meant; he meant—unnatural, not loving my
own daughter, to love another person’s child. What does he know of love
for children, of my love for Seryozha, whom I’ve sacrificed for him?
But that wish to wound me! No, he loves another woman, it must be so.”

And perceiving that, while trying to regain her peace of mind, she had
gone round the same circle that she had been round so often before, and
had come back to her former state of exasperation, she was horrified at
herself. “Can it be impossible? Can it be beyond me to control myself?”
she said to herself, and began again from the beginning. “He’s
truthful, he’s honest, he loves me. I love him, and in a few days the
divorce will come. What more do I want? I want peace of mind and trust,
and I will take the blame on myself. Yes, now when he comes in, I will
tell him I was wrong, though I was not wrong, and we will go away
tomorrow.”

And to escape thinking any more, and being overcome by irritability,
she rang, and ordered the boxes to be brought up for packing their
things for the country.

At ten o’clock Vronsky came in.


Chapter 24

“Well, was it nice?” she asked, coming out to meet him with a penitent
and meek expression.

“Just as usual,” he answered, seeing at a glance that she was in one of
her good moods. He was used by now to these transitions, and he was
particularly glad to see it today, as he was in a specially good humor
himself.

“What do I see? Come, that’s good!” he said, pointing to the boxes in
the passage.

“Yes, we must go. I went out for a drive, and it was so fine I longed
to be in the country. There’s nothing to keep you, is there?”

“It’s the one thing I desire. I’ll be back directly, and we’ll talk it
over; I only want to change my coat. Order some tea.”

And he went into his room.

There was something mortifying in the way he had said “Come, that’s
good,” as one says to a child when it leaves off being naughty, and
still more mortifying was the contrast between her penitent and his
self-confident tone; and for one instant she felt the lust of strife
rising up in her again, but making an effort she conquered it, and met
Vronsky as good-humoredly as before.

When he came in she told him, partly repeating phrases she had prepared
beforehand, how she had spent the day, and her plans for going away.

“You know it came to me almost like an inspiration,” she said. “Why
wait here for the divorce? Won’t it be just the same in the country? I
can’t wait any longer! I don’t want to go on hoping, I don’t want to
hear anything about the divorce. I have made up my mind it shall not
have any more influence on my life. Do you agree?”

“Oh, yes!” he said, glancing uneasily at her excited face.

“What did you do? Who was there?” she said, after a pause.

Vronsky mentioned the names of the guests. “The dinner was first rate,
and the boat race, and it was all pleasant enough, but in Moscow they
can never do anything without something _ridicule_. A lady of a sort
appeared on the scene, teacher of swimming to the Queen of Sweden, and
gave us an exhibition of her skill.”

“How? did she swim?” asked Anna, frowning.

“In an absurd red _costume de natation;_ she was old and hideous too.
So when shall we go?”

“What an absurd fancy! Why, did she swim in some special way, then?”
said Anna, not answering.

“There was absolutely nothing in it. That’s just what I say, it was
awfully stupid. Well, then, when do you think of going?”

Anna shook her head as though trying to drive away some unpleasant
idea.

“When? Why, the sooner the better! By tomorrow we shan’t be ready. The
day after tomorrow.”

“Yes ... oh, no, wait a minute! The day after tomorrow’s Sunday, I have
to be at maman’s,” said Vronsky, embarrassed, because as soon as he
uttered his mother’s name he was aware of her intent, suspicious eyes.
His embarrassment confirmed her suspicion. She flushed hotly and drew
away from him. It was now not the Queen of Sweden’s swimming-mistress
who filled Anna’s imagination, but the young Princess Sorokina. She was
staying in a village near Moscow with Countess Vronskaya.

“Can’t you go tomorrow?” she said.

“Well, no! The deeds and the money for the business I’m going there for
I can’t get by tomorrow,” he answered.

“If so, we won’t go at all.”

“But why so?”

“I shall not go later. Monday or never!”

“What for?” said Vronsky, as though in amazement. “Why, there’s no
meaning in it!”

“There’s no meaning in it to you, because you care nothing for me. You
don’t care to understand my life. The one thing that I cared for here
was Hannah. You say it’s affectation. Why, you said yesterday that I
don’t love my daughter, that I love this English girl, that it’s
unnatural. I should like to know what life there is for me that could
be natural!”

For an instant she had a clear vision of what she was doing, and was
horrified at how she had fallen away from her resolution. But even
though she knew it was her own ruin, she could not restrain herself,
could not keep herself from proving to him that he was wrong, could not
give way to him.

“I never said that; I said I did not sympathize with this sudden
passion.”

“How is it, though you boast of your straightforwardness, you don’t
tell the truth?”

“I never boast, and I never tell lies,” he said slowly, restraining his
rising anger. “It’s a great pity if you can’t respect....”

“Respect was invented to cover the empty place where love should be.
And if you don’t love me any more, it would be better and more honest
to say so.”

“No, this is becoming unbearable!” cried Vronsky, getting up from his
chair; and stopping short, facing her, he said, speaking deliberately:
“What do you try my patience for?” looking as though he might have said
much more, but was restraining himself. “It has limits.”

“What do you mean by that?” she cried, looking with terror at the
undisguised hatred in his whole face, and especially in his cruel,
menacing eyes.

“I mean to say....” he was beginning, but he checked himself. “I must
ask what it is you want of me?”

“What can I want? All I can want is that you should not desert me, as
you think of doing,” she said, understanding all he had not uttered.
“But that I don’t want; that’s secondary. I want love, and there is
none. So then all is over.”

She turned towards the door.

“Stop! sto-op!” said Vronsky, with no change in the gloomy lines of his
brows, though he held her by the hand. “What is it all about? I said
that we must put off going for three days, and on that you told me I
was lying, that I was not an honorable man.”

“Yes, and I repeat that the man who reproaches me with having
sacrificed everything for me,” she said, recalling the words of a still
earlier quarrel, “that he’s worse than a dishonorable man—he’s a
heartless man.”

“Oh, there are limits to endurance!” he cried, and hastily let go her
hand.

“He hates me, that’s clear,” she thought, and in silence, without
looking round, she walked with faltering steps out of the room. “He
loves another woman, that’s even clearer,” she said to herself as she
went into her own room. “I want love, and there is none. So, then, all
is over.” She repeated the words she had said, “and it must be ended.”

“But how?” she asked herself, and she sat down in a low chair before
the looking-glass.

Thoughts of where she would go now, whether to the aunt who had brought
her up, to Dolly, or simply alone abroad, and of what _he_ was doing
now alone in his study; whether this was the final quarrel, or whether
reconciliation were still possible; and of what all her old friends at
Petersburg would say of her now; and of how Alexey Alexandrovitch would
look at it, and many other ideas of what would happen now after this
rupture, came into her head; but she did not give herself up to them
with all her heart. At the bottom of her heart was some obscure idea
that alone interested her, but she could not get clear sight of it.
Thinking once more of Alexey Alexandrovitch, she recalled the time of
her illness after her confinement, and the feeling which never left her
at that time. “Why didn’t I die?” and the words and the feeling of that
time came back to her. And all at once she knew what was in her soul.
Yes, it was that idea which alone solved all. “Yes, to die!... And the
shame and disgrace of Alexey Alexandrovitch and of Seryozha, and my
awful shame, it will all be saved by death. To die! and he will feel
remorse; will be sorry; will love me; he will suffer on my account.”
With the trace of a smile of commiseration for herself she sat down in
the armchair, taking off and putting on the rings on her left hand,
vividly picturing from different sides his feelings after her death.

Approaching footsteps—his steps—distracted her attention. As though
absorbed in the arrangement of her rings, she did not even turn to him.

He went up to her, and taking her by the hand, said softly:

“Anna, we’ll go the day after tomorrow, if you like. I agree to
everything.”

She did not speak.

“What is it?” he urged.

“You know,” she said, and at the same instant, unable to restrain
herself any longer, she burst into sobs.

“Cast me off!” she articulated between her sobs. “I’ll go away tomorrow
... I’ll do more. What am I? An immoral woman! A stone round your neck.
I don’t want to make you wretched, I don’t want to! I’ll set you free.
You don’t love me; you love someone else!”

Vronsky besought her to be calm, and declared that there was no trace
of foundation for her jealousy; that he had never ceased, and never
would cease, to love her; that he loved her more than ever.

“Anna, why distress yourself and me so?” he said to her, kissing her
hands. There was tenderness now in his face, and she fancied she caught
the sound of tears in his voice, and she felt them wet on her hand. And
instantly Anna’s despairing jealousy changed to a despairing passion of
tenderness. She put her arms round him, and covered with kisses his
head, his neck, his hands.


Chapter 25

Feeling that the reconciliation was complete, Anna set eagerly to work
in the morning preparing for their departure. Though it was not settled
whether they should go on Monday or Tuesday, as they had each given way
to the other, Anna packed busily, feeling absolutely indifferent
whether they went a day earlier or later. She was standing in her room
over an open box, taking things out of it, when he came in to see her
earlier than usual, dressed to go out.

“I’m going off at once to see maman; she can send me the money by
Yegorov. And I shall be ready to go tomorrow,” he said.

Though she was in such a good mood, the thought of his visit to his
mother’s gave her a pang.

“No, I shan’t be ready by then myself,” she said; and at once
reflected, “so then it was possible to arrange to do as I wished.” “No,
do as you meant to do. Go into the dining-room, I’m coming directly.
It’s only to turn out those things that aren’t wanted,” she said,
putting something more on the heap of frippery that lay in Annushka’s
arms.

Vronsky was eating his beefsteak when she came into the dining-room.

“You wouldn’t believe how distasteful these rooms have become to me,”
she said, sitting down beside him to her coffee. “There’s nothing more
awful than these _chambres garnies_. There’s no individuality in them,
no soul. These clocks, and curtains, and, worst of all, the
wallpapers—they’re a nightmare. I think of Vozdvizhenskoe as the
promised land. You’re not sending the horses off yet?”

“No, they will come after us. Where are you going to?”

“I wanted to go to Wilson’s to take some dresses to her. So it’s really
to be tomorrow?” she said in a cheerful voice; but suddenly her face
changed.

Vronsky’s valet came in to ask him to sign a receipt for a telegram
from Petersburg. There was nothing out of the way in Vronsky’s getting
a telegram, but he said, as though anxious to conceal something from
her, that the receipt was in his study, and he turned hurriedly to her.

“By tomorrow, without fail, I will finish it all.”

“From whom is the telegram?” she asked, not hearing him.

“From Stiva,” he answered reluctantly.

“Why didn’t you show it to me? What secret can there be between Stiva
and me?”

Vronsky called the valet back, and told him to bring the telegram.

“I didn’t want to show it to you, because Stiva has such a passion for
telegraphing: why telegraph when nothing is settled?”

“About the divorce?”

“Yes; but he says he has not been able to come at anything yet. He has
promised a decisive answer in a day or two. But here it is; read it.”

With trembling hands Anna took the telegram, and read what Vronsky had
told her. At the end was added: “Little hope; but I will do everything
possible and impossible.”

“I said yesterday that it’s absolutely nothing to me when I get, or
whether I never get, a divorce,” she said, flushing crimson. “There was
not the slightest necessity to hide it from me.” “So he may hide and
does hide his correspondence with women from me,” she thought.

“Yashvin meant to come this morning with Voytov,” said Vronsky; “I
believe he’s won from Pyevtsov all and more than he can pay, about
sixty thousand.”

“No,” she said, irritated by his so obviously showing by this change of
subject that he was irritated, “why did you suppose that this news
would affect me so, that you must even try to hide it? I said I don’t
want to consider it, and I should have liked you to care as little
about it as I do.”

“I care about it because I like definiteness,” he said.

“Definiteness is not in the form but the love,” she said, more and more
irritated, not by his words, but by the tone of cool composure in which
he spoke. “What do you want it for?”

“My God! love again,” he thought, frowning.

“Oh, you know what for; for your sake and your children’s in the
future.”

“There won’t be children in the future.”

“That’s a great pity,” he said.

“You want it for the children’s sake, but you don’t think of me?” she
said, quite forgetting or not having heard that he had said, “_For your
sake_ and the children’s.”

The question of the possibility of having children had long been a
subject of dispute and irritation to her. His desire to have children
she interpreted as a proof he did not prize her beauty.

“Oh, I said: for your sake. Above all for your sake,” he repeated,
frowning as though in pain, “because I am certain that the greater part
of your irritability comes from the indefiniteness of the position.”

“Yes, now he has laid aside all pretense, and all his cold hatred for
me is apparent,” she thought, not hearing his words, but watching with
terror the cold, cruel judge who looked mocking her out of his eyes.

“The cause is not that,” she said, “and, indeed, I don’t see how the
cause of my irritability, as you call it, can be that I am completely
in your power. What indefiniteness is there in the position? on the
contrary....”

“I am very sorry that you don’t care to understand,” he interrupted,
obstinately anxious to give utterance to his thought. “The
indefiniteness consists in your imagining that I am free.”

“On that score you can set your mind quite at rest,” she said, and
turning away from him, she began drinking her coffee.

She lifted her cup, with her little finger held apart, and put it to
her lips. After drinking a few sips she glanced at him, and by his
expression, she saw clearly that he was repelled by her hand, and her
gesture, and the sound made by her lips.

“I don’t care in the least what your mother thinks, and what match she
wants to make for you,” she said, putting the cup down with a shaking
hand.

“But we are not talking about that.”

“Yes, that’s just what we are talking about. And let me tell you that a
heartless woman, whether she’s old or not old, your mother or anyone
else, is of no consequence to me, and I would not consent to know her.”

“Anna, I beg you not to speak disrespectfully of my mother.”

“A woman whose heart does not tell her where her son’s happiness and
honor lie has no heart.”

“I repeat my request that you will not speak disrespectfully of my
mother, whom I respect,” he said, raising his voice and looking sternly
at her.

She did not answer. Looking intently at him, at his face, his hands,
she recalled all the details of their reconciliation the previous day,
and his passionate caresses. “There, just such caresses he has
lavished, and will lavish, and longs to lavish on other women!” she
thought.

“You don’t love your mother. That’s all talk, and talk, and talk!” she
said, looking at him with hatred in her eyes.

“Even if so, you must....”

“Must decide, and I have decided,” she said, and she would have gone
away, but at that moment Yashvin walked into the room. Anna greeted him
and remained.

Why, when there was a tempest in her soul, and she felt she was
standing at a turning point in her life, which might have fearful
consequences—why, at that minute, she had to keep up appearances before
an outsider, who sooner or later must know it all—she did not know. But
at once quelling the storm within her, she sat down and began talking
to their guest.

“Well, how are you getting on? Has your debt been paid you?” she asked
Yashvin.

“Oh, pretty fair; I fancy I shan’t get it all, but I shall get a good
half. And when are you off?” said Yashvin, looking at Vronsky, and
unmistakably guessing at a quarrel.

“The day after tomorrow, I think,” said Vronsky.

“You’ve been meaning to go so long, though.”

“But now it’s quite decided,” said Anna, looking Vronsky straight in
the face with a look which told him not to dream of the possibility of
reconciliation.

“Don’t you feel sorry for that unlucky Pyevtsov?” she went on, talking
to Yashvin.

“I’ve never asked myself the question, Anna Arkadyevna, whether I’m
sorry for him or not. You see, all my fortune’s here”—he touched his
breast pocket—“and just now I’m a wealthy man. But today I’m going to
the club, and I may come out a beggar. You see, whoever sits down to
play with me—he wants to leave me without a shirt to my back, and so do
I him. And so we fight it out, and that’s the pleasure of it.”

“Well, but suppose you were married,” said Anna, “how would it be for
your wife?”

Yashvin laughed.

“That’s why I’m not married, and never mean to be.”

“And Helsingfors?” said Vronsky, entering into the conversation and
glancing at Anna’s smiling face. Meeting his eyes, Anna’s face
instantly took a coldly severe expression as though she were saying to
him: “It’s not forgotten. It’s all the same.”

“Were you really in love?” she said to Yashvin.

“Oh heavens! ever so many times! But you see, some men can play but
only so that they can always lay down their cards when the hour of a
_rendezvous_ comes, while I can take up love, but only so as not to be
late for my cards in the evening. That’s how I manage things.”

“No, I didn’t mean that, but the real thing.” She would have said
_Helsingfors_, but would not repeat the word used by Vronsky.

Voytov, who was buying the horse, came in. Anna got up and went out of
the room.

Before leaving the house, Vronsky went into her room. She would have
pretended to be looking for something on the table, but ashamed of
making a pretense, she looked straight in his face with cold eyes.

“What do you want?” she asked in French.

“To get the guarantee for Gambetta, I’ve sold him,” he said, in a tone
which said more clearly than words, “I’ve no time for discussing
things, and it would lead to nothing.”

“I’m not to blame in any way,” he thought. “If she will punish herself,
_tant pis pour elle._ But as he was going he fancied that she said
something, and his heart suddenly ached with pity for her.

“Eh, Anna?” he queried.

“I said nothing,” she answered just as coldly and calmly.

“Oh, nothing, _tant pis_ then,” he thought, feeling cold again, and he
turned and went out. As he was going out he caught a glimpse in the
looking-glass of her face, white, with quivering lips. He even wanted
to stop and to say some comforting word to her, but his legs carried
him out of the room before he could think what to say. The whole of
that day he spent away from home, and when he came in late in the
evening the maid told him that Anna Arkadyevna had a headache and
begged him not to go in to her.


Chapter 26

Never before had a day been passed in quarrel. Today was the first
time. And this was not a quarrel. It was the open acknowledgment of
complete coldness. Was it possible to glance at her as he had glanced
when he came into the room for the guarantee?—to look at her, see her
heart was breaking with despair, and go out without a word with that
face of callous composure? He was not merely cold to her, he hated her
because he loved another woman—that was clear.

And remembering all the cruel words he had said, Anna supplied, too,
the words that he had unmistakably wished to say and could have said to
her, and she grew more and more exasperated.

“I won’t prevent you,” he might say. “You can go where you like. You
were unwilling to be divorced from your husband, no doubt so that you
might go back to him. Go back to him. If you want money, I’ll give it
to you. How many roubles do you want?”

All the most cruel words that a brutal man could say, he said to her in
her imagination, and she could not forgive him for them, as though he
had actually said them.

“But didn’t he only yesterday swear he loved me, he, a truthful and
sincere man? Haven’t I despaired for nothing many times already?” she
said to herself afterwards.

All that day, except for the visit to Wilson’s, which occupied two
hours, Anna spent in doubts whether everything were over or whether
there were still hope of reconciliation, whether she should go away at
once or see him once more. She was expecting him the whole day, and in
the evening, as she went to her own room, leaving a message for him
that her head ached, she said to herself, “If he comes in spite of what
the maid says, it means that he loves me still. If not, it means that
all is over, and then I will decide what I’m to do!...”

In the evening she heard the rumbling of his carriage stop at the
entrance, his ring, his steps and his conversation with the servant; he
believed what was told him, did not care to find out more, and went to
his own room. So then everything was over.

And death rose clearly and vividly before her mind as the sole means of
bringing back love for her in his heart, of punishing him and of
gaining the victory in that strife which the evil spirit in possession
of her heart was waging with him.

Now nothing mattered: going or not going to Vozdvizhenskoe, getting or
not getting a divorce from her husband—all that did not matter. The one
thing that mattered was punishing him. When she poured herself out her
usual dose of opium, and thought that she had only to drink off the
whole bottle to die, it seemed to her so simple and easy, that she
began musing with enjoyment on how he would suffer, and repent and love
her memory when it would be too late. She lay in bed with open eyes, by
the light of a single burned-down candle, gazing at the carved cornice
of the ceiling and at the shadow of the screen that covered part of it,
while she vividly pictured to herself how he would feel when she would
be no more, when she would be only a memory to him. “How could I say
such cruel things to her?” he would say. “How could I go out of the
room without saying anything to her? But now she is no more. She has
gone away from us forever. She is....” Suddenly the shadow of the
screen wavered, pounced on the whole cornice, the whole ceiling; other
shadows from the other side swooped to meet it, for an instant the
shadows flitted back, but then with fresh swiftness they darted
forward, wavered, commingled, and all was darkness. “Death!” she
thought. And such horror came upon her that for a long while she could
not realize where she was, and for a long while her trembling hands
could not find the matches and light another candle, instead of the one
that had burned down and gone out. “No, anything—only to live! Why, I
love him! Why, he loves me! This has been before and will pass,” she
said, feeling that tears of joy at the return to life were trickling
down her cheeks. And to escape from her panic she went hurriedly to his
room.

He was asleep there, and sleeping soundly. She went up to him, and
holding the light above his face, she gazed a long while at him. Now
when he was asleep, she loved him so that at the sight of him she could
not keep back tears of tenderness. But she knew that if he waked up he
would look at her with cold eyes, convinced that he was right, and that
before telling him of her love, she would have to prove to him that he
had been wrong in his treatment of her. Without waking him, she went
back, and after a second dose of opium she fell towards morning into a
heavy, incomplete sleep, during which she never quite lost
consciousness.

In the morning she was waked by a horrible nightmare, which had
recurred several times in her dreams, even before her connection with
Vronsky. A little old man with unkempt beard was doing something bent
down over some iron, muttering meaningless French words, and she, as
she always did in this nightmare (it was what made the horror of it),
felt that this peasant was taking no notice of her, but was doing
something horrible with the iron—over her. And she waked up in a cold
sweat.

When she got up, the previous day came back to her as though veiled in
mist.

“There was a quarrel. Just what has happened several times. I said I
had a headache, and he did not come in to see me. Tomorrow we’re going
away; I must see him and get ready for the journey,” she said to
herself. And learning that he was in his study, she went down to him.
As she passed through the drawing-room she heard a carriage stop at the
entrance, and looking out of the window she saw the carriage, from
which a young girl in a lilac hat was leaning out giving some direction
to the footman ringing the bell. After a parley in the hall, someone
came upstairs, and Vronsky’s steps could be heard passing the
drawing-room. He went rapidly downstairs. Anna went again to the
window. She saw him come out onto the steps without his hat and go up
to the carriage. The young girl in the lilac hat handed him a parcel.
Vronsky, smiling, said something to her. The carriage drove away, he
ran rapidly upstairs again.

The mists that had shrouded everything in her soul parted suddenly. The
feelings of yesterday pierced the sick heart with a fresh pang. She
could not understand now how she could have lowered herself by spending
a whole day with him in his house. She went into his room to announce
her determination.

“That was Madame Sorokina and her daughter. They came and brought me
the money and the deeds from maman. I couldn’t get them yesterday. How
is your head, better?” he said quietly, not wishing to see and to
understand the gloomy and solemn expression of her face.

She looked silently, intently at him, standing in the middle of the
room. He glanced at her, frowned for a moment, and went on reading a
letter. She turned, and went deliberately out of the room. He still
might have turned her back, but she had reached the door, he was still
silent, and the only sound audible was the rustling of the note paper
as he turned it.

“Oh, by the way,” he said at the very moment she was in the doorway,
“we’re going tomorrow for certain, aren’t we?”

“You, but not I,” she said, turning round to him.

“Anna, we can’t go on like this....”

“You, but not I,” she repeated.

“This is getting unbearable!”

“You ... you will be sorry for this,” she said, and went out.

Frightened by the desperate expression with which these words were
uttered, he jumped up and would have run after her, but on second
thoughts he sat down and scowled, setting his teeth. This vulgar—as he
thought it—threat of something vague exasperated him. “I’ve tried
everything,” he thought; “the only thing left is not to pay attention,”
and he began to get ready to drive into town, and again to his mother’s
to get her signature to the deeds.

She heard the sound of his steps about the study and the dining-room.
At the drawing-room he stood still. But he did not turn in to see her,
he merely gave an order that the horse should be given to Voytov if he
came while he was away. Then she heard the carriage brought round, the
door opened, and he came out again. But he went back into the porch
again, and someone was running upstairs. It was the valet running up
for his gloves that had been forgotten. She went to the window and saw
him take the gloves without looking, and touching the coachman on the
back he said something to him. Then without looking up at the window he
settled himself in his usual attitude in the carriage, with his legs
crossed, and drawing on his gloves he vanished round the corner.


Chapter 27

“He has gone! It is over!” Anna said to herself, standing at the
window; and in answer to this statement the impression of the darkness
when the candle had flickered out, and of her fearful dream mingling
into one, filled her heart with cold terror.

“No, that cannot be!” she cried, and crossing the room she rang the
bell. She was so afraid now of being alone, that without waiting for
the servant to come in, she went out to meet him.

“Inquire where the count has gone,” she said. The servant answered that
the count had gone to the stable.

“His honor left word that if you cared to drive out, the carriage would
be back immediately.”

“Very good. Wait a minute. I’ll write a note at once. Send Mihail with
the note to the stables. Make haste.”

She sat down and wrote:

“I was wrong. Come back home; I must explain. For God’s sake come! I’m
afraid.”

She sealed it up and gave it to the servant.

She was afraid of being left alone now; she followed the servant out of
the room, and went to the nursery.

“Why, this isn’t it, this isn’t he! Where are his blue eyes, his sweet,
shy smile?” was her first thought when she saw her chubby, rosy little
girl with her black, curly hair instead of Seryozha, whom in the tangle
of her ideas she had expected to see in the nursery. The little girl
sitting at the table was obstinately and violently battering on it with
a cork, and staring aimlessly at her mother with her pitch-black eyes.
Answering the English nurse that she was quite well, and that she was
going to the country tomorrow, Anna sat down by the little girl and
began spinning the cork to show her. But the child’s loud, ringing
laugh, and the motion of her eyebrows, recalled Vronsky so vividly that
she got up hurriedly, restraining her sobs, and went away. “Can it be
all over? No, it cannot be!” she thought. “He will come back. But how
can he explain that smile, that excitement after he had been talking to
her? But even if he doesn’t explain, I will believe. If I don’t
believe, there’s only one thing left for me, and I can’t.”

She looked at her watch. Twenty minutes had passed. “By now he has
received the note and is coming back. Not long, ten minutes more....
But what if he doesn’t come? No, that cannot be. He mustn’t see me with
tear-stained eyes. I’ll go and wash. Yes, yes; did I do my hair or
not?” she asked herself. And she could not remember. She felt her head
with her hand. “Yes, my hair has been done, but when I did it I can’t
in the least remember.” She could not believe the evidence of her hand,
and went up to the pier-glass to see whether she really had done her
hair. She certainly had, but she could not think when she had done it.
“Who’s that?” she thought, looking in the looking-glass at the swollen
face with strangely glittering eyes, that looked in a scared way at
her. “Why, it’s I!” she suddenly understood, and looking round, she
seemed all at once to feel his kisses on her, and twitched her
shoulders, shuddering. Then she lifted her hand to her lips and kissed
it.

“What is it? Why, I’m going out of my mind!” and she went into her
bedroom, where Annushka was tidying the room.

“Annushka,” she said, coming to a standstill before her, and she stared
at the maid, not knowing what to say to her.

“You meant to go and see Darya Alexandrovna,” said the girl, as though
she understood.

“Darya Alexandrovna? Yes, I’ll go.”

“Fifteen minutes there, fifteen minutes back. He’s coming, he’ll be
here soon.” She took out her watch and looked at it. “But how could he
go away, leaving me in such a state? How can he live, without making it
up with me?” She went to the window and began looking into the street.
Judging by the time, he might be back now. But her calculations might
be wrong, and she began once more to recall when he had started and to
count the minutes.

At the moment when she had moved away to the big clock to compare it
with her watch, someone drove up. Glancing out of the window, she saw
his carriage. But no one came upstairs, and voices could be heard
below. It was the messenger who had come back in the carriage. She went
down to him.

“We didn’t catch the count. The count had driven off on the lower city
road.”

“What do you say? What!...” she said to the rosy, good-humored Mihail,
as he handed her back her note.

“Why, then, he has never received it!” she thought.

“Go with this note to Countess Vronskaya’s place, you know? and bring
an answer back immediately,” she said to the messenger.

“And I, what am I going to do?” she thought. “Yes, I’m going to
Dolly’s, that’s true or else I shall go out of my mind. Yes, and I can
telegraph, too.” And she wrote a telegram. “I absolutely must talk to
you; come at once.” After sending off the telegram, she went to dress.
When she was dressed and in her hat, she glanced again into the eyes of
the plump, comfortable-looking Annushka. There was unmistakable
sympathy in those good-natured little gray eyes.

“Annushka, dear, what am I to do?” said Anna, sobbing and sinking
helplessly into a chair.

“Why fret yourself so, Anna Arkadyevna? Why, there’s nothing out of the
way. You drive out a little, and it’ll cheer you up,” said the maid.

“Yes, I’m going,” said Anna, rousing herself and getting up. “And if
there’s a telegram while I’m away, send it on to Darya Alexandrovna’s
... but no, I shall be back myself.”

“Yes, I mustn’t think, I must do something, drive somewhere, and most
of all, get out of this house,” she said, feeling with terror the
strange turmoil going on in her own heart, and she made haste to go out
and get into the carriage.

“Where to?” asked Pyotr before getting onto the box.

“To Znamenka, the Oblonskys’.”


Chapter 28

It was bright and sunny. A fine rain had been falling all the morning,
and now it had not long cleared up. The iron roofs, the flags of the
roads, the flints of the pavements, the wheels and leather, the brass
and the tinplate of the carriages—all glistened brightly in the May
sunshine. It was three o’clock, and the very liveliest time in the
streets.

As she sat in a corner of the comfortable carriage, that hardly swayed
on its supple springs, while the grays trotted swiftly, in the midst of
the unceasing rattle of wheels and the changing impressions in the pure
air, Anna ran over the events of the last days, and she saw her
position quite differently from how it had seemed at home. Now the
thought of death seemed no longer so terrible and so clear to her, and
death itself no longer seemed so inevitable. Now she blamed herself for
the humiliation to which she had lowered herself. “I entreat him to
forgive me. I have given in to him. I have owned myself in fault. What
for? Can’t I live without him?” And leaving unanswered the question how
she was going to live without him, she fell to reading the signs on the
shops. “Office and warehouse. Dental surgeon. Yes, I’ll tell Dolly all
about it. She doesn’t like Vronsky. I shall be sick and ashamed, but
I’ll tell her. She loves me, and I’ll follow her advice. I won’t give
in to him; I won’t let him train me as he pleases. Filippov, bun shop.
They say they send their dough to Petersburg. The Moscow water is so
good for it. Ah, the springs at Mitishtchen, and the pancakes!”

And she remembered how, long, long ago, when she was a girl of
seventeen, she had gone with her aunt to Troitsa. “Riding, too. Was
that really me, with red hands? How much that seemed to me then
splendid and out of reach has become worthless, while what I had then
has gone out of my reach forever! Could I ever have believed then that
I could come to such humiliation? How conceited and self-satisfied he
will be when he gets my note! But I will show him.... How horrid that
paint smells! Why is it they’re always painting and building? _Modes et
robes_, she read. A man bowed to her. It was Annushka’s husband. “Our
parasites”; she remembered how Vronsky had said that. “Our? Why our?
What’s so awful is that one can’t tear up the past by its roots. One
can’t tear it out, but one can hide one’s memory of it. And I’ll hide
it.” And then she thought of her past with Alexey Alexandrovitch, of
how she had blotted the memory of it out of her life. “Dolly will think
I’m leaving my second husband, and so I certainly must be in the wrong.
As if I cared to be right! I can’t help it!” she said, and she wanted
to cry. But at once she fell to wondering what those two girls could be
smiling about. “Love, most likely. They don’t know how dreary it is,
how low.... The boulevard and the children. Three boys running, playing
at horses. Seryozha! And I’m losing everything and not getting him
back. Yes, I’m losing everything, if he doesn’t return. Perhaps he was
late for the train and has come back by now. Longing for humiliation
again!” she said to herself. “No, I’ll go to Dolly, and say straight
out to her, I’m unhappy, I deserve this, I’m to blame, but still I’m
unhappy, help me. These horses, this carriage—how loathsome I am to
myself in this carriage—all his; but I won’t see them again.”

Thinking over the words in which she would tell Dolly, and mentally
working her heart up to great bitterness, Anna went upstairs.

“Is there anyone with her?” she asked in the hall.

“Katerina Alexandrovna Levin,” answered the footman.

“Kitty! Kitty, whom Vronsky was in love with!” thought Anna, “the girl
he thinks of with love. He’s sorry he didn’t marry her. But me he
thinks of with hatred, and is sorry he had anything to do with me.”

The sisters were having a consultation about nursing when Anna called.
Dolly went down alone to see the visitor who had interrupted their
conversation.

“Well, so you’ve not gone away yet? I meant to have come to you,” she
said; “I had a letter from Stiva today.”

“We had a telegram too,” answered Anna, looking round for Kitty.

“He writes that he can’t make out quite what Alexey Alexandrovitch
wants, but he won’t go away without a decisive answer.”

“I thought you had someone with you. Can I see the letter?”

“Yes; Kitty,” said Dolly, embarrassed. “She stayed in the nursery. She
has been very ill.”

“So I heard. May I see the letter?”

“I’ll get it directly. But he doesn’t refuse; on the contrary, Stiva
has hopes,” said Dolly, stopping in the doorway.

“I haven’t, and indeed I don’t wish it,” said Anna.

“What’s this? Does Kitty consider it degrading to meet me?” thought
Anna when she was alone. “Perhaps she’s right, too. But it’s not for
her, the girl who was in love with Vronsky, it’s not for her to show me
that, even if it is true. I know that in my position I can’t be
received by any decent woman. I knew that from the first moment I
sacrificed everything to him. And this is my reward! Oh, how I hate
him! And what did I come here for? I’m worse here, more miserable.” She
heard from the next room the sisters’ voices in consultation. “And what
am I going to say to Dolly now? Amuse Kitty by the sight of my
wretchedness, submit to her patronizing? No; and besides, Dolly
wouldn’t understand. And it would be no good my telling her. It would
only be interesting to see Kitty, to show her how I despise everyone
and everything, how nothing matters to me now.”

Dolly came in with the letter. Anna read it and handed it back in
silence.

“I knew all that,” she said, “and it doesn’t interest me in the least.”

“Oh, why so? On the contrary, I have hopes,” said Dolly, looking
inquisitively at Anna. She had never seen her in such a strangely
irritable condition. “When are you going away?” she asked.

Anna, half-closing her eyes, looked straight before her and did not
answer.

“Why does Kitty shrink from me?” she said, looking at the door and
flushing red.

“Oh, what nonsense! She’s nursing, and things aren’t going right with
her, and I’ve been advising her.... She’s delighted. She’ll be here in
a minute,” said Dolly awkwardly, not clever at lying. “Yes, here she
is.”

Hearing that Anna had called, Kitty had wanted not to appear, but Dolly
persuaded her. Rallying her forces, Kitty went in, walked up to her,
blushing, and shook hands.

“I am so glad to see you,” she said with a trembling voice.

Kitty had been thrown into confusion by the inward conflict between her
antagonism to this bad woman and her desire to be nice to her. But as
soon as she saw Anna’s lovely and attractive face, all feeling of
antagonism disappeared.

“I should not have been surprised if you had not cared to meet me. I’m
used to everything. You have been ill? Yes, you are changed,” said
Anna.

Kitty felt that Anna was looking at her with hostile eyes. She ascribed
this hostility to the awkward position in which Anna, who had once
patronized her, must feel with her now, and she felt sorry for her.

They talked of Kitty’s illness, of the baby, of Stiva, but it was
obvious that nothing interested Anna.

“I came to say good-bye to you,” she said, getting up.

“Oh, when are you going?”

But again not answering, Anna turned to Kitty.

“Yes, I am very glad to have seen you,” she said with a smile. “I have
heard so much of you from everyone, even from your husband. He came to
see me, and I liked him exceedingly,” she said, unmistakably with
malicious intent. “Where is he?”

“He has gone back to the country,” said Kitty, blushing.

“Remember me to him, be sure you do.”

“I’ll be sure to!” Kitty said naïvely, looking compassionately into her
eyes.

“So good-bye, Dolly.” And kissing Dolly and shaking hands with Kitty,
Anna went out hurriedly.

“She’s just the same and just as charming! She’s very lovely!” said
Kitty, when she was alone with her sister. “But there’s something
piteous about her. Awfully piteous!”

“Yes, there’s something unusual about her today,” said Dolly. “When I
went with her into the hall, I fancied she was almost crying.”


Chapter 29

Anna got into the carriage again in an even worse frame of mind than
when she set out from home. To her previous tortures was added now that
sense of mortification and of being an outcast which she had felt so
distinctly on meeting Kitty.

“Where to? Home?” asked Pyotr.

“Yes, home,” she said, not even thinking now where she was going.

“How they looked at me as something dreadful, incomprehensible, and
curious! What can he be telling the other with such warmth?” she
thought, staring at two men who walked by. “Can one ever tell anyone
what one is feeling? I meant to tell Dolly, and it’s a good thing I
didn’t tell her. How pleased she would have been at my misery! She
would have concealed it, but her chief feeling would have been delight
at my being punished for the happiness she envied me for. Kitty, she
would have been even more pleased. How I can see through her! She knows
I was more than usually sweet to her husband. And she’s jealous and
hates me. And she despises me. In her eyes I’m an immoral woman. If I
were an immoral woman I could have made her husband fall in love with
me ... if I’d cared to. And, indeed, I did care to. There’s someone
who’s pleased with himself,” she thought, as she saw a fat, rubicund
gentleman coming towards her. He took her for an acquaintance, and
lifted his glossy hat above his bald, glossy head, and then perceived
his mistake. “He thought he knew me. Well, he knows me as well as
anyone in the world knows me. I don’t know myself. I know my appetites,
as the French say. They want that dirty ice cream, that they do know
for certain,” she thought, looking at two boys stopping an ice cream
seller, who took a barrel off his head and began wiping his perspiring
face with a towel. “We all want what is sweet and nice. If not
sweetmeats, then a dirty ice. And Kitty’s the same—if not Vronsky, then
Levin. And she envies me, and hates me. And we all hate each other. I
Kitty, Kitty me. Yes, that’s the truth. ‘_Tiutkin, coiffeur._’ _Je me
fais coiffer par Tiutkin...._ I’ll tell him that when he comes,” she
thought and smiled. But the same instant she remembered that she had no
one now to tell anything amusing to. “And there’s nothing amusing,
nothing mirthful, really. It’s all hateful. They’re singing for
vespers, and how carefully that merchant crosses himself! as if he were
afraid of missing something. Why these churches and this singing and
this humbug? Simply to conceal that we all hate each other like these
cab drivers who are abusing each other so angrily. Yashvin says, ‘He
wants to strip me of my shirt, and I him of his.’ Yes, that’s the
truth!”

She was plunged in these thoughts, which so engrossed her that she left
off thinking of her own position, when the carriage drew up at the
steps of her house. It was only when she saw the porter running out to
meet her that she remembered she had sent the note and the telegram.

“Is there an answer?” she inquired.

“I’ll see this minute,” answered the porter, and glancing into his
room, he took out and gave her the thin square envelope of a telegram.
“I can’t come before ten o’clock.—Vronsky,” she read.

“And hasn’t the messenger come back?”

“No,” answered the porter.

“Then, since it’s so, I know what I must do,” she said, and feeling a
vague fury and craving for revenge rising up within her, she ran
upstairs. “I’ll go to him myself. Before going away forever, I’ll tell
him all. Never have I hated anyone as I hate that man!” she thought.
Seeing his hat on the rack, she shuddered with aversion. She did not
consider that his telegram was an answer to her telegram and that he
had not yet received her note. She pictured him to herself as talking
calmly to his mother and Princess Sorokina and rejoicing at her
sufferings. “Yes, I must go quickly,” she said, not knowing yet where
she was going. She longed to get away as quickly as possible from the
feelings she had gone through in that awful house. The servants, the
walls, the things in that house—all aroused repulsion and hatred in her
and lay like a weight upon her.

“Yes, I must go to the railway station, and if he’s not there, then go
there and catch him.” Anna looked at the railway timetable in the
newspapers. An evening train went at two minutes past eight. “Yes, I
shall be in time.” She gave orders for the other horses to be put in
the carriage, and packed in a traveling-bag the things needed for a few
days. She knew she would never come back here again.

Among the plans that came into her head she vaguely determined that
after what would happen at the station or at the countess’s house, she
would go as far as the first town on the Nizhni road and stop there.

Dinner was on the table; she went up, but the smell of the bread and
cheese was enough to make her feel that all food was disgusting. She
ordered the carriage and went out. The house threw a shadow now right
across the street, but it was a bright evening and still warm in the
sunshine. Annushka, who came down with her things, and Pyotr, who put
the things in the carriage, and the coachman, evidently out of humor,
were all hateful to her, and irritated her by their words and actions.

“I don’t want you, Pyotr.”

“But how about the ticket?”

“Well, as you like, it doesn’t matter,” she said crossly.

Pyotr jumped on the box, and putting his arms akimbo, told the coachman
to drive to the booking-office.


Chapter 30

“Here it is again! Again I understand it all!” Anna said to herself, as
soon as the carriage had started and swaying lightly, rumbled over the
tiny cobbles of the paved road, and again one impression followed
rapidly upon another.

“Yes; what was the last thing I thought of so clearly?” she tried to
recall it. “‘_Tiutkin, coiffeur?_’—no, not that. Yes, of what Yashvin
says, the struggle for existence and hatred is the one thing that holds
men together. No, it’s a useless journey you’re making,” she said,
mentally addressing a party in a coach and four, evidently going for an
excursion into the country. “And the dog you’re taking with you will be
no help to you. You can’t get away from yourselves.” Turning her eyes
in the direction Pyotr had turned to look, she saw a factory-hand
almost dead-drunk, with hanging head, being led away by a policeman.
“Come, he’s found a quicker way,” she thought. “Count Vronsky and I did
not find that happiness either, though we expected so much from it.”
And now for the first time Anna turned that glaring light in which she
was seeing everything on to her relations with him, which she had
hitherto avoided thinking about. “What was it he sought in me? Not love
so much as the satisfaction of vanity.” She remembered his words, the
expression of his face, that recalled an abject setter-dog, in the
early days of their connection. And everything now confirmed this.
“Yes, there was the triumph of success in him. Of course there was love
too, but the chief element was the pride of success. He boasted of me.
Now that’s over. There’s nothing to be proud of. Not to be proud of,
but to be ashamed of. He has taken from me all he could, and now I am
no use to him. He is weary of me and is trying not to be dishonorable
in his behavior to me. He let that out yesterday—he wants divorce and
marriage so as to burn his ships. He loves me, but how? The zest is
gone, as the English say. That fellow wants everyone to admire him and
is very much pleased with himself,” she thought, looking at a red-faced
clerk, riding on a riding-school horse. “Yes, there’s not the same
flavor about me for him now. If I go away from him, at the bottom of
his heart he will be glad.”

This was not mere supposition, she saw it distinctly in the piercing
light, which revealed to her now the meaning of life and human
relations.

“My love keeps growing more passionate and egoistic, while his is
waning and waning, and that’s why we’re drifting apart.” She went on
musing. “And there’s no help for it. He is everything for me, and I
want him more and more to give himself up to me entirely. And he wants
more and more to get away from me. We walked to meet each other up to
the time of our love, and then we have been irresistibly drifting in
different directions. And there’s no altering that. He tells me I’m
insanely jealous, and I have told myself that I am insanely jealous;
but it’s not true. I’m not jealous, but I’m unsatisfied. But....” she
opened her lips, and shifted her place in the carriage in the
excitement, aroused by the thought that suddenly struck her. “If I
could be anything but a mistress, passionately caring for nothing but
his caresses; but I can’t and I don’t care to be anything else. And by
that desire I rouse aversion in him, and he rouses fury in me, and it
cannot be different. Don’t I know that he wouldn’t deceive me, that he
has no schemes about Princess Sorokina, that he’s not in love with
Kitty, that he won’t desert me! I know all that, but it makes it no
better for me. If without loving me, from _duty_ he’ll be good and kind
to me, without what I want, that’s a thousand times worse than
unkindness! That’s—hell! And that’s just how it is. For a long while
now he hasn’t loved me. And where love ends, hate begins. I don’t know
these streets at all. Hills it seems, and still houses, and houses....
And in the houses always people and people.... How many of them, no
end, and all hating each other! Come, let me try and think what I want,
to make me happy. Well? Suppose I am divorced, and Alexey
Alexandrovitch lets me have Seryozha, and I marry Vronsky.” Thinking of
Alexey Alexandrovitch, she at once pictured him with extraordinary
vividness as though he were alive before her, with his mild, lifeless,
dull eyes, the blue veins in his white hands, his intonations and the
cracking of his fingers, and remembering the feeling which had existed
between them, and which was also called love, she shuddered with
loathing. “Well, I’m divorced, and become Vronsky’s wife. Well, will
Kitty cease looking at me as she looked at me today? No. And will
Seryozha leave off asking and wondering about my two husbands? And is
there any new feeling I can awaken between Vronsky and me? Is there
possible, if not happiness, some sort of ease from misery? No, no!” she
answered now without the slightest hesitation. “Impossible! We are
drawn apart by life, and I make his unhappiness, and he mine, and
there’s no altering him or me. Every attempt has been made, the screw
has come unscrewed. Oh, a beggar woman with a baby. She thinks I’m
sorry for her. Aren’t we all flung into the world only to hate each
other, and so to torture ourselves and each other? Schoolboys
coming—laughing Seryozha?” she thought. “I thought, too, that I loved
him, and used to be touched by my own tenderness. But I have lived
without him, I gave him up for another love, and did not regret the
exchange till that love was satisfied.” And with loathing she thought
of what she meant by that love. And the clearness with which she saw
life now, her own and all men’s, was a pleasure to her. “It’s so with
me and Pyotr, and the coachman, Fyodor, and that merchant, and all the
people living along the Volga, where those placards invite one to go,
and everywhere and always,” she thought when she had driven under the
low-pitched roof of the Nizhigorod station, and the porters ran to meet
her.

“A ticket to Obiralovka?” said Pyotr.

She had utterly forgotten where and why she was going, and only by a
great effort she understood the question.

“Yes,” she said, handing him her purse, and taking a little red bag in
her hand, she got out of the carriage.

Making her way through the crowd to the first-class waiting-room, she
gradually recollected all the details of her position, and the plans
between which she was hesitating. And again at the old sore places,
hope and then despair poisoned the wounds of her tortured, fearfully
throbbing heart. As she sat on the star-shaped sofa waiting for the
train, she gazed with aversion at the people coming and going (they
were all hateful to her), and thought how she would arrive at the
station, would write him a note, and what she would write to him, and
how he was at this moment complaining to his mother of his position,
not understanding her sufferings, and how she would go into the room,
and what she would say to him. Then she thought that life might still
be happy, and how miserably she loved and hated him, and how fearfully
her heart was beating.


Chapter 31

A bell rang, some young men, ugly and impudent, and at the same time
careful of the impression they were making, hurried by. Pyotr, too,
crossed the room in his livery and top-boots, with his dull, animal
face, and came up to her to take her to the train. Some noisy men were
quiet as she passed them on the platform, and one whispered something
about her to another—something vile, no doubt. She stepped up on the
high step, and sat down in a carriage by herself on a dirty seat that
had been white. Her bag lay beside her, shaken up and down by the
springiness of the seat. With a foolish smile Pyotr raised his hat,
with its colored band, at the window, in token of farewell; an impudent
conductor slammed the door and the latch. A grotesque-looking lady
wearing a bustle (Anna mentally undressed the woman, and was appalled
at her hideousness), and a little girl laughing affectedly ran down the
platform.

“Katerina Andreevna, she’s got them all, _ma tante!_” cried the girl.

“Even the child’s hideous and affected,” thought Anna. To avoid seeing
anyone, she got up quickly and seated herself at the opposite window of
the empty carriage. A misshapen-looking peasant covered with dirt, in a
cap from which his tangled hair stuck out all round, passed by that
window, stooping down to the carriage wheels. “There’s something
familiar about that hideous peasant,” thought Anna. And remembering her
dream, she moved away to the opposite door, shaking with terror. The
conductor opened the door and let in a man and his wife.

“Do you wish to get out?”

Anna made no answer. The conductor and her two fellow-passengers did
not notice under her veil her panic-stricken face. She went back to her
corner and sat down. The couple seated themselves on the opposite side,
and intently but surreptitiously scrutinized her clothes. Both husband
and wife seemed repulsive to Anna. The husband asked, would she allow
him to smoke, obviously not with a view to smoking but to getting into
conversation with her. Receiving her assent, he said to his wife in
French something about caring less to smoke than to talk. They made
inane and affected remarks to one another, entirely for her benefit.
Anna saw clearly that they were sick of each other, and hated each
other. And no one could have helped hating such miserable
monstrosities.

A second bell sounded, and was followed by moving of luggage, noise,
shouting and laughter. It was so clear to Anna that there was nothing
for anyone to be glad of, that this laughter irritated her agonizingly,
and she would have liked to stop up her ears not to hear it. At last
the third bell rang, there was a whistle and a hiss of steam, and a
clank of chains, and the man in her carriage crossed himself. “It would
be interesting to ask him what meaning he attaches to that,” thought
Anna, looking angrily at him. She looked past the lady out of the
window at the people who seemed whirling by as they ran beside the
train or stood on the platform. The train, jerking at regular intervals
at the junctions of the rails, rolled by the platform, past a stone
wall, a signal-box, past other trains; the wheels, moving more smoothly
and evenly, resounded with a slight clang on the rails. The window was
lighted up by the bright evening sun, and a slight breeze fluttered the
curtain. Anna forgot her fellow passengers, and to the light swaying of
the train she fell to thinking again, as she breathed the fresh air.

“Yes, what did I stop at? That I couldn’t conceive a position in which
life would not be a misery, that we are all created to be miserable,
and that we all know it, and all invent means of deceiving each other.
And when one sees the truth, what is one to do?”

“That’s what reason is given man for, to escape from what worries him,”
said the lady in French, lisping affectedly, and obviously pleased with
her phrase.

The words seemed an answer to Anna’s thoughts.

“To escape from what worries him,” repeated Anna. And glancing at the
red-cheeked husband and the thin wife, she saw that the sickly wife
considered herself misunderstood, and the husband deceived her and
encouraged her in that idea of herself. Anna seemed to see all their
history and all the crannies of their souls, as it were turning a light
upon them. But there was nothing interesting in them, and she pursued
her thought.

“Yes, I’m very much worried, and that’s what reason was given me for,
to escape; so then one must escape: why not put out the light when
there’s nothing more to look at, when it’s sickening to look at it all?
But how? Why did the conductor run along the footboard, why are they
shrieking, those young men in that train? why are they talking, why are
they laughing? It’s all falsehood, all lying, all humbug, all
cruelty!...”

When the train came into the station, Anna got out into the crowd of
passengers, and moving apart from them as if they were lepers, she
stood on the platform, trying to think what she had come here for, and
what she meant to do. Everything that had seemed to her possible before
was now so difficult to consider, especially in this noisy crowd of
hideous people who would not leave her alone. One moment porters ran up
to her proffering their services, then young men, clacking their heels
on the planks of the platform and talking loudly, stared at her; people
meeting her dodged past on the wrong side. Remembering that she had
meant to go on further if there were no answer, she stopped a porter
and asked if her coachman were not here with a note from Count Vronsky.

“Count Vronsky? They sent up here from the Vronskys just this minute,
to meet Princess Sorokina and her daughter. And what is the coachman
like?”

Just as she was talking to the porter, the coachman Mihail, red and
cheerful in his smart blue coat and chain, evidently proud of having so
successfully performed his commission, came up to her and gave her a
letter. She broke it open, and her heart ached before she had read it.

“I am very sorry your note did not reach me. I will be home at ten,”
Vronsky had written carelessly....

“Yes, that’s what I expected!” she said to herself with an evil smile.

“Very good, you can go home then,” she said softly, addressing Mihail.
She spoke softly because the rapidity of her heart’s beating hindered
her breathing. “No, I won’t let you make me miserable,” she thought
menacingly, addressing not him, not herself, but the power that made
her suffer, and she walked along the platform.

Two maid-servants walking along the platform turned their heads,
staring at her and making some remarks about her dress. “Real,” they
said of the lace she was wearing. The young men would not leave her in
peace. Again they passed by, peering into her face, and with a laugh
shouting something in an unnatural voice. The station-master coming up
asked her whether she was going by train. A boy selling kvas never took
his eyes off her. “My God! where am I to go?” she thought, going
farther and farther along the platform. At the end she stopped. Some
ladies and children, who had come to meet a gentleman in spectacles,
paused in their loud laughter and talking, and stared at her as she
reached them. She quickened her pace and walked away from them to the
edge of the platform. A luggage train was coming in. The platform began
to sway, and she fancied she was in the train again.

And all at once she thought of the man crushed by the train the day she
had first met Vronsky, and she knew what she had to do. With a rapid,
light step she went down the steps that led from the tank to the rails
and stopped quite near the approaching train.

She looked at the lower part of the carriages, at the screws and chains
and the tall cast-iron wheel of the first carriage slowly moving up,
and trying to measure the middle between the front and back wheels, and
the very minute when that middle point would be opposite her.

“There,” she said to herself, looking into the shadow of the carriage,
at the sand and coal dust which covered the sleepers—“there, in the
very middle, and I will punish him and escape from everyone and from
myself.”

She tried to fling herself below the wheels of the first carriage as it
reached her; but the red bag which she tried to drop out of her hand
delayed her, and she was too late; she missed the moment. She had to
wait for the next carriage. A feeling such as she had known when about
to take the first plunge in bathing came upon her, and she crossed
herself. That familiar gesture brought back into her soul a whole
series of girlish and childish memories, and suddenly the darkness that
had covered everything for her was torn apart, and life rose up before
her for an instant with all its bright past joys. But she did not take
her eyes from the wheels of the second carriage. And exactly at the
moment when the space between the wheels came opposite her, she dropped
the red bag, and drawing her head back into her shoulders, fell on her
hands under the carriage, and lightly, as though she would rise again
at once, dropped on to her knees. And at the same instant she was
terror-stricken at what she was doing. “Where am I? What am I doing?
What for?” She tried to get up, to drop backwards; but something huge
and merciless struck her on the head and rolled her on her back. “Lord,
forgive me all!” she said, feeling it impossible to struggle. A peasant
muttering something was working at the iron above her. And the light by
which she had read the book filled with troubles, falsehoods, sorrow,
and evil, flared up more brightly than ever before, lighted up for her
all that had been in darkness, flickered, began to grow dim, and was
quenched forever.




PART EIGHT

Chapter 1


Almost two months had passed. The hot summer was half over, but Sergey
Ivanovitch was only just preparing to leave Moscow.

Sergey Ivanovitch’s life had not been uneventful during this time. A
year ago he had finished his book, the fruit of six years’ labor,
“Sketch of a Survey of the Principles and Forms of Government in Europe
and Russia.” Several sections of this book and its introduction had
appeared in periodical publications, and other parts had been read by
Sergey Ivanovitch to persons of his circle, so that the leading ideas
of the work could not be completely novel to the public. But still
Sergey Ivanovitch had expected that on its appearance his book would be
sure to make a serious impression on society, and if it did not cause a
revolution in social science it would, at any rate, make a great stir
in the scientific world.

After the most conscientious revision the book had last year been
published, and had been distributed among the booksellers.

Though he asked no one about it, reluctantly and with feigned
indifference answered his friends’ inquiries as to how the book was
going, and did not even inquire of the booksellers how the book was
selling, Sergey Ivanovitch was all on the alert, with strained
attention, watching for the first impression his book would make in the
world and in literature.

But a week passed, a second, a third, and in society no impression
whatever could be detected. His friends who were specialists and
savants, occasionally—unmistakably from politeness—alluded to it. The
rest of his acquaintances, not interested in a book on a learned
subject, did not talk of it at all. And society generally—just now
especially absorbed in other things—was absolutely indifferent. In the
press, too, for a whole month there was not a word about his book.

Sergey Ivanovitch had calculated to a nicety the time necessary for
writing a review, but a month passed, and a second, and still there was
silence.

Only in the _Northern Beetle_, in a comic article on the singer
Drabanti, who had lost his voice, there was a contemptuous allusion to
Koznishev’s book, suggesting that the book had been long ago seen
through by everyone, and was a subject of general ridicule.

At last in the third month a critical article appeared in a serious
review. Sergey Ivanovitch knew the author of the article. He had met
him once at Golubtsov’s.

The author of the article was a young man, an invalid, very bold as a
writer, but extremely deficient in breeding and shy in personal
relations.

In spite of his absolute contempt for the author, it was with complete
respect that Sergey Ivanovitch set about reading the article. The
article was awful.

The critic had undoubtedly put an interpretation upon the book which
could not possibly be put on it. But he had selected quotations so
adroitly that for people who had not read the book (and obviously
scarcely anyone had read it) it seemed absolutely clear that the whole
book was nothing but a medley of high-flown phrases, not even—as
suggested by marks of interrogation—used appropriately, and that the
author of the book was a person absolutely without knowledge of the
subject. And all this was so wittily done that Sergey Ivanovitch would
not have disowned such wit himself. But that was just what was so
awful.

In spite of the scrupulous conscientiousness with which Sergey
Ivanovitch verified the correctness of the critic’s arguments, he did
not for a minute stop to ponder over the faults and mistakes which were
ridiculed; but unconsciously he began immediately trying to recall
every detail of his meeting and conversation with the author of the
article.

“Didn’t I offend him in some way?” Sergey Ivanovitch wondered.

And remembering that when they met he had corrected the young man about
something he had said that betrayed ignorance, Sergey Ivanovitch found
the clue to explain the article.

This article was followed by a deadly silence about the book both in
the press and in conversation, and Sergey Ivanovitch saw that his six
years’ task, toiled at with such love and labor, had gone, leaving no
trace.

Sergey Ivanovitch’s position was still more difficult from the fact
that, since he had finished his book, he had had no more literary work
to do, such as had hitherto occupied the greater part of his time.

Sergey Ivanovitch was clever, cultivated, healthy, and energetic, and
he did not know what use to make of his energy. Conversations in
drawing-rooms, in meetings, assemblies, and committees—everywhere where
talk was possible—took up part of his time. But being used for years to
town life, he did not waste all his energies in talk, as his less
experienced younger brother did, when he was in Moscow. He had a great
deal of leisure and intellectual energy still to dispose of.

Fortunately for him, at this period so difficult for him from the
failure of his book, the various public questions of the dissenting
sects, of the American alliance, of the Samara famine, of exhibitions,
and of spiritualism, were definitely replaced in public interest by the
Slavonic question, which had hitherto rather languidly interested
society, and Sergey Ivanovitch, who had been one of the first to raise
this subject, threw himself into it heart and soul.

In the circle to which Sergey Ivanovitch belonged, nothing was talked
of or written about just now but the Servian War. Everything that the
idle crowd usually does to kill time was done now for the benefit of
the Slavonic States. Balls, concerts, dinners, matchboxes, ladies’
dresses, beer, restaurants—everything testified to sympathy with the
Slavonic peoples.

From much of what was spoken and written on the subject, Sergey
Ivanovitch differed on various points. He saw that the Slavonic
question had become one of those fashionable distractions which succeed
one another in providing society with an object and an occupation. He
saw, too, that a great many people were taking up the subject from
motives of self-interest and self-advertisement. He recognized that the
newspapers published a great deal that was superfluous and exaggerated,
with the sole aim of attracting attention and outbidding one another.
He saw that in this general movement those who thrust themselves most
forward and shouted the loudest were men who had failed and were
smarting under a sense of injury—generals without armies, ministers not
in the ministry, journalists not on any paper, party leaders without
followers. He saw that there was a great deal in it that was frivolous
and absurd. But he saw and recognized an unmistakable growing
enthusiasm, uniting all classes, with which it was impossible not to
sympathize. The massacre of men who were fellow Christians, and of the
same Slavonic race, excited sympathy for the sufferers and indignation
against the oppressors. And the heroism of the Servians and
Montenegrins struggling for a great cause begot in the whole people a
longing to help their brothers not in word but in deed.

But in this there was another aspect that rejoiced Sergey Ivanovitch.
That was the manifestation of public opinion. The public had definitely
expressed its desire. The soul of the people had, as Sergey Ivanovitch
said, found expression. And the more he worked in this cause, the more
incontestable it seemed to him that it was a cause destined to assume
vast dimensions, to create an epoch.

He threw himself heart and soul into the service of this great cause,
and forgot to think about his book. His whole time now was engrossed by
it, so that he could scarcely manage to answer all the letters and
appeals addressed to him. He worked the whole spring and part of the
summer, and it was only in July that he prepared to go away to his
brother’s in the country.

He was going both to rest for a fortnight, and in the very heart of the
people, in the farthest wilds of the country, to enjoy the sight of
that uplifting of the spirit of the people, of which, like all
residents in the capital and big towns, he was fully persuaded.
Katavasov had long been meaning to carry out his promise to stay with
Levin, and so he was going with him.

Chapter 2

Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had only just reached the station of
the Kursk line, which was particularly busy and full of people that
day, when, looking round for the groom who was following with their
things, they saw a party of volunteers driving up in four cabs. Ladies
met them with bouquets of flowers, and followed by the rushing crowd
they went into the station.

One of the ladies, who had met the volunteers, came out of the hall and
addressed Sergey Ivanovitch.

“You too come to see them off?” she asked in French.

“No, I’m going away myself, princess. To my brother’s for a holiday. Do
you always see them off?” said Sergey Ivanovitch with a hardly
perceptible smile.

“Oh, that would be impossible!” answered the princess. “Is it true that
eight hundred have been sent from us already? Malvinsky wouldn’t
believe me.”

“More than eight hundred. If you reckon those who have been sent not
directly from Moscow, over a thousand,” answered Sergey Ivanovitch.

“There! That’s just what I said!” exclaimed the lady. “And it’s true
too, I suppose, that more than a million has been subscribed?”

“Yes, princess.”

“What do you say to today’s telegram? Beaten the Turks again.”

“Yes, so I saw,” answered Sergey Ivanovitch. They were speaking of the
last telegram stating that the Turks had been for three days in
succession beaten at all points and put to flight, and that tomorrow a
decisive engagement was expected.

“Ah, by the way, a splendid young fellow has asked leave to go, and
they’ve made some difficulty, I don’t know why. I meant to ask you; I
know him; please write a note about his case. He’s being sent by
Countess Lidia Ivanovna.”

Sergey Ivanovitch asked for all the details the princess knew about the
young man, and going into the first-class waiting-room, wrote a note to
the person on whom the granting of leave of absence depended, and
handed it to the princess.

“You know Count Vronsky, the notorious one ... is going by this train?”
said the princess with a smile full of triumph and meaning, when he
found her again and gave her the letter.

“I had heard he was going, but I did not know when. By this train?”

“I’ve seen him. He’s here: there’s only his mother seeing him off. It’s
the best thing, anyway, that he could do.”

“Oh, yes, of course.”

While they were talking the crowd streamed by them into the
dining-room. They went forward too, and heard a gentleman with a glass
in his hand delivering a loud discourse to the volunteers. “In the
service of religion, humanity, and our brothers,” the gentleman said,
his voice growing louder and louder; “to this great cause mother Moscow
dedicates you with her blessing. _Jivio!_” he concluded, loudly and
tearfully.

Everyone shouted _Jivio!_ and a fresh crowd dashed into the hall,
almost carrying the princess off her legs.

“Ah, princess! that was something like!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
suddenly appearing in the middle of the crowd and beaming upon them
with a delighted smile. “Capitally, warmly said, wasn’t it? Bravo! And
Sergey Ivanovitch! Why, you ought to have said something—just a few
words, you know, to encourage them; you do that so well,” he added with
a soft, respectful, and discreet smile, moving Sergey Ivanovitch
forward a little by the arm.

“No, I’m just off.”

“Where to?”

“To the country, to my brother’s,” answered Sergey Ivanovitch.

“Then you’ll see my wife. I’ve written to her, but you’ll see her
first. Please tell her that they’ve seen me and that it’s ‘all right,’
as the English say. She’ll understand. Oh, and be so good as to tell
her I’m appointed secretary of the committee.... But she’ll understand!
You know, _les petites misères de la vie humaine,_” he said, as it were
apologizing to the princess. “And Princess Myakaya—not Liza, but
Bibish—is sending a thousand guns and twelve nurses. Did I tell you?”

“Yes, I heard so,” answered Koznishev indifferently.

“It’s a pity you’re going away,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Tomorrow
we’re giving a dinner to two who’re setting off—Dimer-Bartnyansky from
Petersburg and our Veslovsky, Grisha. They’re both going. Veslovsky’s
only lately married. There’s a fine fellow for you! Eh, princess?” he
turned to the lady.

The princess looked at Koznishev without replying. But the fact that
Sergey Ivanovitch and the princess seemed anxious to get rid of him did
not in the least disconcert Stepan Arkadyevitch. Smiling, he stared at
the feather in the princess’s hat, and then about him as though he were
going to pick something up. Seeing a lady approaching with a collecting
box, he beckoned her up and put in a five-rouble note.

“I can never see these collecting boxes unmoved while I’ve money in my
pocket,” he said. “And how about today’s telegram? Fine chaps those
Montenegrins!”

“You don’t say so!” he cried, when the princess told him that Vronsky
was going by this train. For an instant Stepan Arkadyevitch’s face
looked sad, but a minute later, when, stroking his mustaches and
swinging as he walked, he went into the hall where Vronsky was, he had
completely forgotten his own despairing sobs over his sister’s corpse,
and he saw in Vronsky only a hero and an old friend.

“With all his faults one can’t refuse to do him justice,” said the
princess to Sergey Ivanovitch as soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch had left
them. “What a typically Russian, Slav nature! Only, I’m afraid it won’t
be pleasant for Vronsky to see him. Say what you will, I’m touched by
that man’s fate. Do talk to him a little on the way,” said the
princess.

“Yes, perhaps, if it happens so.”

“I never liked him. But this atones for a great deal. He’s not merely
going himself, he’s taking a squadron at his own expense.”

“Yes, so I heard.”

A bell sounded. Everyone crowded to the doors. “Here he is!” said the
princess, indicating Vronsky, who with his mother on his arm walked by,
wearing a long overcoat and wide-brimmed black hat. Oblonsky was
walking beside him, talking eagerly of something.

Vronsky was frowning and looking straight before him, as though he did
not hear what Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying.

Probably on Oblonsky’s pointing them out, he looked round in the
direction where the princess and Sergey Ivanovitch were standing, and
without speaking lifted his hat. His face, aged and worn by suffering,
looked stony.

Going onto the platform, Vronsky left his mother and disappeared into a
compartment.

On the platform there rang out “God save the Tsar,” then shouts of
“hurrah!” and _“jivio!”_ One of the volunteers, a tall, very young man
with a hollow chest, was particularly conspicuous, bowing and waving
his felt hat and a nosegay over his head. Then two officers emerged,
bowing too, and a stout man with a big beard, wearing a greasy forage
cap.


Chapter 3

Saying good-bye to the princess, Sergey Ivanovitch was joined by
Katavasov; together they got into a carriage full to overflowing, and
the train started.

At Tsaritsino station the train was met by a chorus of young men
singing “Hail to Thee!” Again the volunteers bowed and poked their
heads out, but Sergey Ivanovitch paid no attention to them. He had had
so much to do with the volunteers that the type was familiar to him and
did not interest him. Katavasov, whose scientific work had prevented
his having a chance of observing them hitherto, was very much
interested in them and questioned Sergey Ivanovitch.

Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to go into the second-class and talk to
them himself. At the next station Katavasov acted on this suggestion.

At the first stop he moved into the second-class and made the
acquaintance of the volunteers. They were sitting in a corner of the
carriage, talking loudly and obviously aware that the attention of the
passengers and Katavasov as he got in was concentrated upon them. More
loudly than all talked the tall, hollow-chested young man. He was
unmistakably tipsy, and was relating some story that had occurred at
his school. Facing him sat a middle-aged officer in the Austrian
military jacket of the Guards uniform. He was listening with a smile to
the hollow-chested youth, and occasionally pulling him up. The third,
in an artillery uniform, was sitting on a box beside them. A fourth was
asleep.

Entering into conversation with the youth, Katavasov learned that he
was a wealthy Moscow merchant who had run through a large fortune
before he was two-and-twenty. Katavasov did not like him, because he
was unmanly and effeminate and sickly. He was obviously convinced,
especially now after drinking, that he was performing a heroic action,
and he bragged of it in the most unpleasant way.

The second, the retired officer, made an unpleasant impression too upon
Katavasov. He was, it seemed, a man who had tried everything. He had
been on a railway, had been a land-steward, and had started factories,
and he talked, quite without necessity, of all he had done, and used
learned expressions quite inappropriately.

The third, the artilleryman, on the contrary, struck Katavasov very
favorably. He was a quiet, modest fellow, unmistakably impressed by the
knowledge of the officer and the heroic self-sacrifice of the merchant
and saying nothing about himself. When Katavasov asked him what had
impelled him to go to Servia, he answered modestly:

“Oh, well, everyone’s going. The Servians want help, too. I’m sorry for
them.”

“Yes, you artillerymen especially are scarce there,” said Katavasov.

“Oh, I wasn’t long in the artillery, maybe they’ll put me into the
infantry or the cavalry.”

“Into the infantry when they need artillery more than anything?” said
Katavasov, fancying from the artilleryman’s apparent age that he must
have reached a fairly high grade.

“I wasn’t long in the artillery; I’m a cadet retired,” he said, and he
began to explain how he had failed in his examination.

All of this together made a disagreeable impression on Katavasov, and
when the volunteers got out at a station for a drink, Katavasov would
have liked to compare his unfavorable impression in conversation with
someone. There was an old man in the carriage, wearing a military
overcoat, who had been listening all the while to Katavasov’s
conversation with the volunteers. When they were left alone, Katavasov
addressed him.

“What different positions they come from, all those fellows who are
going off there,” Katavasov said vaguely, not wishing to express his
own opinion, and at the same time anxious to find out the old man’s
views.

The old man was an officer who had served on two campaigns. He knew
what makes a soldier, and judging by the appearance and the talk of
those persons, by the swagger with which they had recourse to the
bottle on the journey, he considered them poor soldiers. Moreover, he
lived in a district town, and he was longing to tell how one soldier
had volunteered from his town, a drunkard and a thief whom no one would
employ as a laborer. But knowing by experience that in the present
condition of the public temper it was dangerous to express an opinion
opposed to the general one, and especially to criticize the volunteers
unfavorably, he too watched Katavasov without committing himself.

“Well, men are wanted there,” he said, laughing with his eyes. And they
fell to talking of the last war news, and each concealed from the other
his perplexity as to the engagement expected next day, since the Turks
had been beaten, according to the latest news, at all points. And so
they parted, neither giving expression to his opinion.

Katavasov went back to his own carriage, and with reluctant hypocrisy
reported to Sergey Ivanovitch his observations of the volunteers, from
which it would appear that they were capital fellows.

At a big station at a town the volunteers were again greeted with
shouts and singing, again men and women with collecting boxes appeared,
and provincial ladies brought bouquets to the volunteers and followed
them into the refreshment room; but all this was on a much smaller and
feebler scale than in Moscow.


Chapter 4

While the train was stopping at the provincial town, Sergey Ivanovitch
did not go to the refreshment room, but walked up and down the
platform.

The first time he passed Vronsky’s compartment he noticed that the
curtain was drawn over the window; but as he passed it the second time
he saw the old countess at the window. She beckoned to Koznishev.

“I’m going, you see, taking him as far as Kursk,” she said.

“Yes, so I heard,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, standing at her window and
peeping in. “What a noble act on his part!” he added, noticing that
Vronsky was not in the compartment.

“Yes, after his misfortune, what was there for him to do?”

“What a terrible thing it was!” said Sergey Ivanovitch.

“Ah, what I have been through! But do get in.... Ah, what I have been
through!” she repeated, when Sergey Ivanovitch had got in and sat down
beside her. “You can’t conceive it! For six weeks he did not speak to
anyone, and would not touch food except when I implored him. And not
for one minute could we leave him alone. We took away everything he
could have used against himself. We lived on the ground floor, but
there was no reckoning on anything. You know, of course, that he had
shot himself once already on her account,” she said, and the old lady’s
eyelashes twitched at the recollection. “Yes, hers was the fitting end
for such a woman. Even the death she chose was low and vulgar.”

“It’s not for us to judge, countess,” said Sergey Ivanovitch; “but I
can understand that it has been very hard for you.”

“Ah, don’t speak of it! I was staying on my estate, and he was with me.
A note was brought him. He wrote an answer and sent it off. We hadn’t
an idea that she was close by at the station. In the evening I had only
just gone to my room, when my Mary told me a lady had thrown herself
under the train. Something seemed to strike me at once. I knew it was
she. The first thing I said was, he was not to be told. But they’d told
him already. His coachman was there and saw it all. When I ran into his
room, he was beside himself—it was fearful to see him. He didn’t say a
word, but galloped off there. I don’t know to this day what happened
there, but he was brought back at death’s door. I shouldn’t have known
him. _Prostration complète,_ the doctor said. And that was followed
almost by madness. Oh, why talk of it!” said the countess with a wave
of her hand. “It was an awful time! No, say what you will, she was a
bad woman. Why, what is the meaning of such desperate passions? It was
all to show herself something out of the way. Well, and that she did
do. She brought herself to ruin and two good men—her husband and my
unhappy son.”

“And what did her husband do?” asked Sergey Ivanovitch.

“He has taken her daughter. Alexey was ready to agree to anything at
first. Now it worries him terribly that he should have given his own
child away to another man. But he can’t take back his word. Karenin
came to the funeral. But we tried to prevent his meeting Alexey. For
him, for her husband, it was easier, anyway. She had set him free. But
my poor son was utterly given up to her. He had thrown up everything,
his career, me, and even then she had no mercy on him, but of set
purpose she made his ruin complete. No, say what you will, her very
death was the death of a vile woman, of no religious feeling. God
forgive me, but I can’t help hating the memory of her, when I look at
my son’s misery!”

“But how is he now?”

“It was a blessing from Providence for us—this Servian war. I’m old,
and I don’t understand the rights and wrongs of it, but it’s come as a
providential blessing to him. Of course for me, as his mother, it’s
terrible; and what’s worse, they say, _ce n’est pas très bien vu à
Pétersbourg_. But it can’t be helped! It was the one thing that could
rouse him. Yashvin—a friend of his—he had lost all he had at cards and
he was going to Servia. He came to see him and persuaded him to go. Now
it’s an interest for him. Do please talk to him a little. I want to
distract his mind. He’s so low-spirited. And as bad luck would have it,
he has toothache too. But he’ll be delighted to see you. Please do talk
to him; he’s walking up and down on that side.”

Sergey Ivanovitch said he would be very glad to, and crossed over to
the other side of the station.


Chapter 5

In the slanting evening shadows cast by the baggage piled up on the
platform, Vronsky in his long overcoat and slouch hat, with his hands
in his pockets, strode up and down, like a wild beast in a cage,
turning sharply after twenty paces. Sergey Ivanovitch fancied, as he
approached him, that Vronsky saw him but was pretending not to see.
This did not affect Sergey Ivanovitch in the slightest. He was above
all personal considerations with Vronsky.

At that moment Sergey Ivanovitch looked upon Vronsky as a man taking an
important part in a great cause, and Koznishev thought it his duty to
encourage him and express his approval. He went up to him.

Vronsky stood still, looked intently at him, recognized him, and going
a few steps forward to meet him, shook hands with him very warmly.

“Possibly you didn’t wish to see me,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, “but
couldn’t I be of use to you?”

“There’s no one I should less dislike seeing than you,” said Vronsky.
“Excuse me; and there’s nothing in life for me to like.”

“I quite understand, and I merely meant to offer you my services,” said
Sergey Ivanovitch, scanning Vronsky’s face, full of unmistakable
suffering. “Wouldn’t it be of use to you to have a letter to
Ristitch—to Milan?”

“Oh, no!” Vronsky said, seeming to understand him with difficulty. “If
you don’t mind, let’s walk on. It’s so stuffy among the carriages. A
letter? No, thank you; to meet death one needs no letters of
introduction. Nor for the Turks....” he said, with a smile that was
merely of the lips. His eyes still kept their look of angry suffering.

“Yes; but you might find it easier to get into relations, which are
after all essential, with anyone prepared to see you. But that’s as you
like. I was very glad to hear of your intention. There have been so
many attacks made on the volunteers, and a man like you raises them in
public estimation.”

“My use as a man,” said Vronsky, “is that life’s worth nothing to me.
And that I’ve enough bodily energy to cut my way into their ranks, and
to trample on them or fall—I know that. I’m glad there’s something to
give my life for, for it’s not simply useless but loathsome to me.
Anyone’s welcome to it.” And his jaw twitched impatiently from the
incessant gnawing toothache, that prevented him from even speaking with
a natural expression.

“You will become another man, I predict,” said Sergey Ivanovitch,
feeling touched. “To deliver one’s brother-men from bondage is an aim
worth death and life. God grant you success outwardly—and inwardly
peace,” he added, and he held out his hand. Vronsky warmly pressed his
outstretched hand.

“Yes, as a weapon I may be of some use. But as a man, I’m a wreck,” he
jerked out.

He could hardly speak for the throbbing ache in his strong teeth, that
were like rows of ivory in his mouth. He was silent, and his eyes
rested on the wheels of the tender, slowly and smoothly rolling along
the rails.

And all at once a different pain, not an ache, but an inner trouble,
that set his whole being in anguish, made him for an instant forget his
toothache. As he glanced at the tender and the rails, under the
influence of the conversation with a friend he had not met since his
misfortune, he suddenly recalled _her_—that is, what was left of her
when he had run like one distraught into the cloak room of the railway
station—on the table, shamelessly sprawling out among strangers, the
bloodstained body so lately full of life; the head unhurt dropping back
with its weight of hair, and the curling tresses about the temples, and
the exquisite face, with red, half-opened mouth, the strange, fixed
expression, piteous on the lips and awful in the still open eyes, that
seemed to utter that fearful phrase—that he would be sorry for it—that
she had said when they were quarreling.

And he tried to think of her as she was when he met her the first time,
at a railway station too, mysterious, exquisite, loving, seeking and
giving happiness, and not cruelly revengeful as he remembered her on
that last moment. He tried to recall his best moments with her, but
those moments were poisoned forever. He could only think of her as
triumphant, successful in her menace of a wholly useless remorse never
to be effaced. He lost all consciousness of toothache, and his face
worked with sobs.

Passing twice up and down beside the baggage in silence and regaining
his self-possession, he addressed Sergey Ivanovitch calmly:

“You have had no telegrams since yesterday’s? Yes, driven back for a
third time, but a decisive engagement expected for tomorrow.”

And after talking a little more of King Milan’s proclamation, and the
immense effect it might have, they parted, going to their carriages on
hearing the second bell.


Chapter 6

Sergey Ivanovitch had not telegraphed to his brother to send to meet
him, as he did not know when he should be able to leave Moscow. Levin
was not at home when Katavasov and Sergey Ivanovitch in a fly hired at
the station drove up to the steps of the Pokrovskoe house, as black as
Moors from the dust of the road. Kitty, sitting on the balcony with her
father and sister, recognized her brother-in-law, and ran down to meet
him.

“What a shame not to have let us know,” she said, giving her hand to
Sergey Ivanovitch, and putting her forehead up for him to kiss.

“We drove here capitally, and have not put you out,” answered Sergey
Ivanovitch. “I’m so dirty. I’m afraid to touch you. I’ve been so busy,
I didn’t know when I should be able to tear myself away. And so you’re
still as ever enjoying your peaceful, quiet happiness,” he said,
smiling, “out of the reach of the current in your peaceful backwater.
Here’s our friend Fyodor Vassilievitch who has succeeded in getting
here at last.”

“But I’m not a negro, I shall look like a human being when I wash,”
said Katavasov in his jesting fashion, and he shook hands and smiled,
his teeth flashing white in his black face.

“Kostya will be delighted. He has gone to his settlement. It’s time he
should be home.”

“Busy as ever with his farming. It really is a peaceful backwater,”
said Katavasov; “while we in town think of nothing but the Servian war.
Well, how does our friend look at it? He’s sure not to think like other
people.”

“Oh, I don’t know, like everybody else,” Kitty answered, a little
embarrassed, looking round at Sergey Ivanovitch. “I’ll send to fetch
him. Papa’s staying with us. He’s only just come home from abroad.”

And making arrangements to send for Levin and for the guests to wash,
one in his room and the other in what had been Dolly’s, and giving
orders for their luncheon, Kitty ran out onto the balcony, enjoying the
freedom, and rapidity of movement, of which she had been deprived
during the months of her pregnancy.

“It’s Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov, a professor,” she said.

“Oh, that’s a bore in this heat,” said the prince.

“No, papa, he’s very nice, and Kostya’s very fond of him,” Kitty said,
with a deprecating smile, noticing the irony on her father’s face.

“Oh, I didn’t say anything.”

“You go to them, darling,” said Kitty to her sister, “and entertain
them. They saw Stiva at the station; he was quite well. And I must run
to Mitya. As ill-luck would have it, I haven’t fed him since tea. He’s
awake now, and sure to be screaming.” And feeling a rush of milk, she
hurried to the nursery.

This was not a mere guess; her connection with the child was still so
close, that she could gauge by the flow of her milk his need of food,
and knew for certain he was hungry.

She knew he was crying before she reached the nursery. And he was
indeed crying. She heard him and hastened. But the faster she went, the
louder he screamed. It was a fine healthy scream, hungry and impatient.

“Has he been screaming long, nurse, very long?” said Kitty hurriedly,
seating herself on a chair, and preparing to give the baby the breast.
“But give me him quickly. Oh, nurse, how tiresome you are! There, tie
the cap afterwards, do!”

The baby’s greedy scream was passing into sobs.

“But you can’t manage so, ma’am,” said Agafea Mihalovna, who was almost
always to be found in the nursery. “He must be put straight. A-oo!
a-oo!” she chanted over him, paying no attention to the mother.

The nurse brought the baby to his mother. Agafea Mihalovna followed him
with a face dissolving with tenderness.

“He knows me, he knows me. In God’s faith, Katerina Alexandrovna,
ma’am, he knew me!” Agafea Mihalovna cried above the baby’s screams.

But Kitty did not hear her words. Her impatience kept growing, like the
baby’s.

Their impatience hindered things for a while. The baby could not get
hold of the breast right, and was furious.

At last, after despairing, breathless screaming, and vain sucking,
things went right, and mother and child felt simultaneously soothed,
and both subsided into calm.

“But poor darling, he’s all in perspiration!” said Kitty in a whisper,
touching the baby.

“What makes you think he knows you?” she added, with a sidelong glance
at the baby’s eyes, that peered roguishly, as she fancied, from under
his cap, at his rhythmically puffing cheeks, and the little red-palmed
hand he was waving.

“Impossible! If he knew anyone, he would have known me,” said Kitty, in
response to Agafea Mihalovna’s statement, and she smiled.

She smiled because, though she said he could not know her, in her heart
she was sure that he knew not merely Agafea Mihalovna, but that he knew
and understood everything, and knew and understood a great deal too
that no one else knew, and that she, his mother, had learned and come
to understand only through him. To Agafea Mihalovna, to the nurse, to
his grandfather, to his father even, Mitya was a living being,
requiring only material care, but for his mother he had long been a
mortal being, with whom there had been a whole series of spiritual
relations already.

“When he wakes up, please God, you shall see for yourself. Then when I
do like this, he simply beams on me, the darling! Simply beams like a
sunny day!” said Agafea Mihalovna.

“Well, well; then we shall see,” whispered Kitty. “But now go away,
he’s going to sleep.”


Chapter 7

Agafea Mihalovna went out on tiptoe; the nurse let down the blind,
chased a fly out from under the muslin canopy of the crib, and a
bumblebee struggling on the window-frame, and sat down waving a faded
branch of birch over the mother and the baby.

“How hot it is! if God would send a drop of rain,” she said.

“Yes, yes, sh—sh—sh——” was all Kitty answered, rocking a little, and
tenderly squeezing the plump little arm, with rolls of fat at the
wrist, which Mitya still waved feebly as he opened and shut his eyes.
That hand worried Kitty; she longed to kiss the little hand, but was
afraid to for fear of waking the baby. At last the little hand ceased
waving, and the eyes closed. Only from time to time, as he went on
sucking, the baby raised his long, curly eyelashes and peeped at his
mother with wet eyes, that looked black in the twilight. The nurse had
left off fanning, and was dozing. From above came the peals of the old
prince’s voice, and the chuckle of Katavasov.

“They have got into talk without me,” thought Kitty, “but still it’s
vexing that Kostya’s out. He’s sure to have gone to the bee-house
again. Though it’s a pity he’s there so often, still I’m glad. It
distracts his mind. He’s become altogether happier and better now than
in the spring. He used to be so gloomy and worried that I felt
frightened for him. And how absurd he is!” she whispered, smiling.

She knew what worried her husband. It was his unbelief. Although, if
she had been asked whether she supposed that in the future life, if he
did not believe, he would be damned, she would have had to admit that
he would be damned, his unbelief did not cause her unhappiness. And
she, confessing that for an unbeliever there can be no salvation, and
loving her husband’s soul more than anything in the world, thought with
a smile of his unbelief, and told herself that he was absurd.

“What does he keep reading philosophy of some sort for all this year?”
she wondered. “If it’s all written in those books, he can understand
them. If it’s all wrong, why does he read them? He says himself that he
would like to believe. Then why is it he doesn’t believe? Surely from
his thinking so much? And he thinks so much from being solitary. He’s
always alone, alone. He can’t talk about it all to us. I fancy he’ll be
glad of these visitors, especially Katavasov. He likes discussions with
them,” she thought, and passed instantly to the consideration of where
it would be more convenient to put Katavasov, to sleep alone or to
share Sergey Ivanovitch’s room. And then an idea suddenly struck her,
which made her shudder and even disturb Mitya, who glanced severely at
her. “I do believe the laundress hasn’t sent the washing yet, and all
the best sheets are in use. If I don’t see to it, Agafea Mihalovna will
give Sergey Ivanovitch the wrong sheets,” and at the very idea of this
the blood rushed to Kitty’s face.

“Yes, I will arrange it,” she decided, and going back to her former
thoughts, she remembered that some spiritual question of importance had
been interrupted, and she began to recall what. “Yes, Kostya, an
unbeliever,” she thought again with a smile.

“Well, an unbeliever then! Better let him always be one than like
Madame Stahl, or what I tried to be in those days abroad. No, he won’t
ever sham anything.”

And a recent instance of his goodness rose vividly to her mind. A
fortnight ago a penitent letter had come from Stepan Arkadyevitch to
Dolly. He besought her to save his honor, to sell her estate to pay his
debts. Dolly was in despair, she detested her husband, despised him,
pitied him, resolved on a separation, resolved to refuse, but ended by
agreeing to sell part of her property. After that, with an
irrepressible smile of tenderness, Kitty recalled her husband’s
shamefaced embarrassment, his repeated awkward efforts to approach the
subject, and how at last, having thought of the one means of helping
Dolly without wounding her pride, he had suggested to Kitty—what had
not occurred to her before—that she should give up her share of the
property.

“He an unbeliever indeed! With his heart, his dread of offending
anyone, even a child! Everything for others, nothing for himself.
Sergey Ivanovitch simply considers it as Kostya’s duty to be his
steward. And it’s the same with his sister. Now Dolly and her children
are under his guardianship; all these peasants who come to him every
day, as though he were bound to be at their service.”

“Yes, only be like your father, only like him,” she said, handing Mitya
over to the nurse, and putting her lips to his cheek.

Chapter 8

Ever since, by his beloved brother’s deathbed, Levin had first glanced
into the questions of life and death in the light of these new
convictions, as he called them, which had during the period from his
twentieth to his thirty-fourth year imperceptibly replaced his childish
and youthful beliefs—he had been stricken with horror, not so much of
death, as of life, without any knowledge of whence, and why, and how,
and what it was. The physical organization, its decay, the
indestructibility of matter, the law of the conservation of energy,
evolution, were the words which usurped the place of his old belief.
These words and the ideas associated with them were very well for
intellectual purposes. But for life they yielded nothing, and Levin
felt suddenly like a man who has changed his warm fur cloak for a
muslin garment, and going for the first time into the frost is
immediately convinced, not by reason, but by his whole nature that he
is as good as naked, and that he must infallibly perish miserably.

From that moment, though he did not distinctly face it, and still went
on living as before, Levin had never lost this sense of terror at his
lack of knowledge.

He vaguely felt, too, that what he called his new convictions were not
merely lack of knowledge, but that they were part of a whole order of
ideas, in which no knowledge of what he needed was possible.

At first, marriage, with the new joys and duties bound up with it, had
completely crowded out these thoughts. But of late, while he was
staying in Moscow after his wife’s confinement, with nothing to do, the
question that clamored for solution had more and more often, more and
more insistently, haunted Levin’s mind.

The question was summed up for him thus: “If I do not accept the
answers Christianity gives to the problems of my life, what answers do
I accept?” And in the whole arsenal of his convictions, so far from
finding any satisfactory answers, he was utterly unable to find
anything at all like an answer.

He was in the position of a man seeking food in toy shops and tool
shops.

Instinctively, unconsciously, with every book, with every conversation,
with every man he met, he was on the lookout for light on these
questions and their solution.

What puzzled and distracted him above everything was that the majority
of men of his age and circle had, like him, exchanged their old beliefs
for the same new convictions, and yet saw nothing to lament in this,
and were perfectly satisfied and serene. So that, apart from the
principal question, Levin was tortured by other questions too. Were
these people sincere? he asked himself, or were they playing a part? or
was it that they understood the answers science gave to these problems
in some different, clearer sense than he did? And he assiduously
studied both these men’s opinions and the books which treated of these
scientific explanations.

One fact he had found out since these questions had engrossed his mind,
was that he had been quite wrong in supposing from the recollections of
the circle of his young days at college, that religion had outlived its
day, and that it was now practically non-existent. All the people
nearest to him who were good in their lives were believers. The old
prince, and Lvov, whom he liked so much, and Sergey Ivanovitch, and all
the women believed, and his wife believed as simply as he had believed
in his earliest childhood, and ninety-nine hundredths of the Russian
people, all the working people for whose life he felt the deepest
respect, believed.

Another fact of which he became convinced, after reading many
scientific books, was that the men who shared his views had no other
construction to put on them, and that they gave no explanation of the
questions which he felt he could not live without answering, but simply
ignored their existence and attempted to explain other questions of no
possible interest to him, such as the evolution of organisms, the
materialistic theory of consciousness, and so forth.

Moreover, during his wife’s confinement, something had happened that
seemed extraordinary to him. He, an unbeliever, had fallen into
praying, and at the moment he prayed, he believed. But that moment had
passed, and he could not make his state of mind at that moment fit into
the rest of his life.

He could not admit that at that moment he knew the truth, and that now
he was wrong; for as soon as he began thinking calmly about it, it all
fell to pieces. He could not admit that he was mistaken then, for his
spiritual condition then was precious to him, and to admit that it was
a proof of weakness would have been to desecrate those moments. He was
miserably divided against himself, and strained all his spiritual
forces to the utmost to escape from this condition.

Chapter 9

These doubts fretted and harassed him, growing weaker or stronger from
time to time, but never leaving him. He read and thought, and the more
he read and the more he thought, the further he felt from the aim he
was pursuing.

Of late in Moscow and in the country, since he had become convinced
that he would find no solution in the materialists, he had read and
re-read thoroughly Plato, Spinoza, Kant, Schelling, Hegel, and
Schopenhauer, the philosophers who gave a non-materialistic explanation
of life.

Their ideas seemed to him fruitful when he was reading or was himself
seeking arguments to refute other theories, especially those of the
materialists; but as soon as he began to read or sought for himself a
solution of problems, the same thing always happened. As long as he
followed the fixed definition of obscure words such as _spirit, will,
freedom, essence,_ purposely letting himself go into the snare of words
the philosophers set for him, he seemed to comprehend something. But he
had only to forget the artificial train of reasoning, and to turn from
life itself to what had satisfied him while thinking in accordance with
the fixed definitions, and all this artificial edifice fell to pieces
at once like a house of cards, and it became clear that the edifice had
been built up out of those transposed words, apart from anything in
life more important than reason.

At one time, reading Schopenhauer, he put in place of his _will_ the
word _love_, and for a couple of days this new philosophy charmed him,
till he removed a little away from it. But then, when he turned from
life itself to glance at it again, it fell away too, and proved to be
the same muslin garment with no warmth in it.

His brother Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to read the theological works
of Homiakov. Levin read the second volume of Homiakov’s works, and in
spite of the elegant, epigrammatic, argumentative style which at first
repelled him, he was impressed by the doctrine of the church he found
in them. He was struck at first by the idea that the apprehension of
divine truths had not been vouchsafed to man, but to a corporation of
men bound together by love—to the church. What delighted him was the
thought how much easier it was to believe in a still existing living
church, embracing all the beliefs of men, and having God at its head,
and therefore holy and infallible, and from it to accept the faith in
God, in the creation, the fall, the redemption, than to begin with God,
a mysterious, far-away God, the creation, etc. But afterwards, on
reading a Catholic writer’s history of the church, and then a Greek
orthodox writer’s history of the church, and seeing that the two
churches, in their very conception infallible, each deny the authority
of the other, Homiakov’s doctrine of the church lost all its charm for
him, and this edifice crumbled into dust like the philosophers’
edifices.

All that spring he was not himself, and went through fearful moments of
horror.

“Without knowing what I am and why I am here, life’s impossible; and
that I can’t know, and so I can’t live,” Levin said to himself.

“In infinite time, in infinite matter, in infinite space, is formed a
bubble-organism, and that bubble lasts a while and bursts, and that
bubble is Me.”

It was an agonizing error, but it was the sole logical result of ages
of human thought in that direction.

This was the ultimate belief on which all the systems elaborated by
human thought in almost all their ramifications rested. It was the
prevalent conviction, and of all other explanations Levin had
unconsciously, not knowing when or how, chosen it, as anyway the
clearest, and made it his own.

But it was not merely a falsehood, it was the cruel jeer of some wicked
power, some evil, hateful power, to whom one could not submit.

He must escape from this power. And the means of escape every man had
in his own hands. He had but to cut short this dependence on evil. And
there was one means—death.

And Levin, a happy father and husband, in perfect health, was several
times so near suicide that he hid the cord that he might not be tempted
to hang himself, and was afraid to go out with his gun for fear of
shooting himself.

But Levin did not shoot himself, and did not hang himself; he went on
living.


Chapter 10

When Levin thought what he was and what he was living for, he could
find no answer to the questions and was reduced to despair, but he left
off questioning himself about it. It seemed as though he knew both what
he was and for what he was living, for he acted and lived resolutely
and without hesitation. Indeed, in these latter days he was far more
decided and unhesitating in life than he had ever been.

When he went back to the country at the beginning of June, he went back
also to his usual pursuits. The management of the estate, his relations
with the peasants and the neighbors, the care of his household, the
management of his sister’s and brother’s property, of which he had the
direction, his relations with his wife and kindred, the care of his
child, and the new bee-keeping hobby he had taken up that spring,
filled all his time.

These things occupied him now, not because he justified them to himself
by any sort of general principles, as he had done in former days; on
the contrary, disappointed by the failure of his former efforts for the
general welfare, and too much occupied with his own thought and the
mass of business with which he was burdened from all sides, he had
completely given up thinking of the general good, and he busied himself
with all this work simply because it seemed to him that he must do what
he was doing—that he could not do otherwise. In former days—almost from
childhood, and increasingly up to full manhood—when he had tried to do
anything that would be good for all, for humanity, for Russia, for the
whole village, he had noticed that the idea of it had been pleasant,
but the work itself had always been incoherent, that then he had never
had a full conviction of its absolute necessity, and that the work that
had begun by seeming so great, had grown less and less, till it
vanished into nothing. But now, since his marriage, when he had begun
to confine himself more and more to living for himself, though he
experienced no delight at all at the thought of the work he was doing,
he felt a complete conviction of its necessity, saw that it succeeded
far better than in old days, and that it kept on growing more and more.

Now, involuntarily it seemed, he cut more and more deeply into the soil
like a plough, so that he could not be drawn out without turning aside
the furrow.

To live the same family life as his father and forefathers—that is, in
the same condition of culture—and to bring up his children in the same,
was incontestably necessary. It was as necessary as dining when one was
hungry. And to do this, just as it was necessary to cook dinner, it was
necessary to keep the mechanism of agriculture at Pokrovskoe going so
as to yield an income. Just as incontestably as it was necessary to
repay a debt was it necessary to keep the property in such a condition
that his son, when he received it as a heritage, would say “thank you”
to his father as Levin had said “thank you” to his grandfather for all
he built and planted. And to do this it was necessary to look after the
land himself, not to let it, and to breed cattle, manure the fields,
and plant timber.

It was impossible not to look after the affairs of Sergey Ivanovitch,
of his sister, of the peasants who came to him for advice and were
accustomed to do so—as impossible as to fling down a child one is
carrying in one’s arms. It was necessary to look after the comfort of
his sister-in-law and her children, and of his wife and baby, and it
was impossible not to spend with them at least a short time each day.

And all this, together with shooting and his new bee-keeping, filled up
the whole of Levin’s life, which had no meaning at all for him, when he
began to think.

But besides knowing thoroughly what he had to do, Levin knew in just
the same way _how_ he had to do it all, and what was more important
than the rest.

He knew he must hire laborers as cheaply as possible; but to hire men
under bond, paying them in advance at less than the current rate of
wages, was what he must not do, even though it was very profitable.
Selling straw to the peasants in times of scarcity of provender was
what he might do, even though he felt sorry for them; but the tavern
and the pothouse must be put down, though they were a source of income.
Felling timber must be punished as severely as possible, but he could
not exact forfeits for cattle being driven onto his fields; and though
it annoyed the keeper and made the peasants not afraid to graze their
cattle on his land, he could not keep their cattle as a punishment.

To Pyotr, who was paying a money-lender ten per cent. a month, he must
lend a sum of money to set him free. But he could not let off peasants
who did not pay their rent, nor let them fall into arrears. It was
impossible to overlook the bailiff’s not having mown the meadows and
letting the hay spoil; and it was equally impossible to mow those acres
where a young copse had been planted. It was impossible to excuse a
laborer who had gone home in the busy season because his father was
dying, however sorry he might feel for him, and he must subtract from
his pay those costly months of idleness. But it was impossible not to
allow monthly rations to the old servants who were of no use for
anything.

Levin knew that when he got home he must first of all go to his wife,
who was unwell, and that the peasants who had been waiting for three
hours to see him could wait a little longer. He knew too that,
regardless of all the pleasure he felt in taking a swarm, he must
forego that pleasure, and leave the old man to see to the bees alone,
while he talked to the peasants who had come after him to the
bee-house.

Whether he were acting rightly or wrongly he did not know, and far from
trying to prove that he was, nowadays he avoided all thought or talk
about it.

Reasoning had brought him to doubt, and prevented him from seeing what
he ought to do and what he ought not. When he did not think, but simply
lived, he was continually aware of the presence of an infallible judge
in his soul, determining which of two possible courses of action was
the better and which was the worse, and as soon as he did not act
rightly, he was at once aware of it.

So he lived, not knowing and not seeing any chance of knowing what he
was and what he was living for, and harassed at this lack of knowledge
to such a point that he was afraid of suicide, and yet firmly laying
down his own individual definite path in life.


Chapter 11

The day on which Sergey Ivanovitch came to Pokrovskoe was one of
Levin’s most painful days. It was the very busiest working time, when
all the peasantry show an extraordinary intensity of self-sacrifice in
labor, such as is never shown in any other conditions of life, and
would be highly esteemed if the men who showed these qualities
themselves thought highly of them, and if it were not repeated every
year, and if the results of this intense labor were not so simple.

To reap and bind the rye and oats and to carry it, to mow the meadows,
turn over the fallows, thrash the seed and sow the winter corn—all this
seems so simple and ordinary; but to succeed in getting through it all
everyone in the village, from the old man to the young child, must toil
incessantly for three or four weeks, three times as hard as usual,
living on rye-beer, onions, and black bread, thrashing and carrying the
sheaves at night, and not giving more than two or three hours in the
twenty-four to sleep. And every year this is done all over Russia.

Having lived the greater part of his life in the country and in the
closest relations with the peasants, Levin always felt in this busy
time that he was infected by this general quickening of energy in the
people.

In the early morning he rode over to the first sowing of the rye, and
to the oats, which were being carried to the stacks, and returning home
at the time his wife and sister-in-law were getting up, he drank coffee
with them and walked to the farm, where a new thrashing machine was to
be set working to get ready the seed-corn.

He was standing in the cool granary, still fragrant with the leaves of
the hazel branches interlaced on the freshly peeled aspen beams of the
new thatch roof. He gazed through the open door in which the dry bitter
dust of the thrashing whirled and played, at the grass of the thrashing
floor in the sunlight and the fresh straw that had been brought in from
the barn, then at the speckly-headed, white-breasted swallows that flew
chirping in under the roof and, fluttering their wings, settled in the
crevices of the doorway, then at the peasants bustling in the dark,
dusty barn, and he thought strange thoughts.

“Why is it all being done?” he thought. “Why am I standing here, making
them work? What are they all so busy for, trying to show their zeal
before me? What is that old Matrona, my old friend, toiling for? (I
doctored her, when the beam fell on her in the fire)” he thought,
looking at a thin old woman who was raking up the grain, moving
painfully with her bare, sun-blackened feet over the uneven, rough
floor. “Then she recovered, but today or tomorrow or in ten years she
won’t; they’ll bury her, and nothing will be left either of her or of
that smart girl in the red jacket, who with that skillful, soft action
shakes the ears out of their husks. They’ll bury her and this piebald
horse, and very soon too,” he thought, gazing at the heavily moving,
panting horse that kept walking up the wheel that turned under him.
“And they will bury her and Fyodor the thrasher with his curly beard
full of chaff and his shirt torn on his white shoulders—they will bury
him. He’s untying the sheaves, and giving orders, and shouting to the
women, and quickly setting straight the strap on the moving wheel. And
what’s more, it’s not them alone—me they’ll bury too, and nothing will
be left. What for?”

He thought this, and at the same time looked at his watch to reckon how
much they thrashed in an hour. He wanted to know this so as to judge by
it the task to set for the day.

“It’ll soon be one, and they’re only beginning the third sheaf,”
thought Levin. He went up to the man that was feeding the machine, and
shouting over the roar of the machine he told him to put it in more
slowly. “You put in too much at a time, Fyodor. Do you see—it gets
choked, that’s why it isn’t getting on. Do it evenly.”

Fyodor, black with the dust that clung to his moist face, shouted
something in response, but still went on doing it as Levin did not want
him to.

Levin, going up to the machine, moved Fyodor aside, and began feeding
the corn in himself. Working on till the peasants’ dinner hour, which
was not long in coming, he went out of the barn with Fyodor and fell
into talk with him, stopping beside a neat yellow sheaf of rye laid on
the thrashing floor for seed.

Fyodor came from a village at some distance from the one in which Levin
had once allotted land to his cooperative association. Now it had been
let to a former house porter.

Levin talked to Fyodor about this land and asked whether Platon, a
well-to-do peasant of good character belonging to the same village,
would not take the land for the coming year.

“It’s a high rent; it wouldn’t pay Platon, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,”
answered the peasant, picking the ears off his sweat-drenched shirt.

“But how does Kirillov make it pay?”

“Mituh!” (so the peasant called the house porter, in a tone of
contempt), “you may be sure he’ll make it pay, Konstantin Dmitrievitch!
He’ll get his share, however he has to squeeze to get it! He’s no mercy
on a Christian. But Uncle Fokanitch” (so he called the old peasant
Platon), “do you suppose he’d flay the skin off a man? Where there’s
debt, he’ll let anyone off. And he’ll not wring the last penny out.
He’s a man too.”

“But why will he let anyone off?”

“Oh, well, of course, folks are different. One man lives for his own
wants and nothing else, like Mituh, he only thinks of filling his
belly, but Fokanitch is a righteous man. He lives for his soul. He does
not forget God.”

“How thinks of God? How does he live for his soul?” Levin almost
shouted.

“Why, to be sure, in truth, in God’s way. Folks are different. Take you
now, you wouldn’t wrong a man....”

“Yes, yes, good-bye!” said Levin, breathless with excitement, and
turning round he took his stick and walked quickly away towards home.
At the peasant’s words that Fokanitch lived for his soul, in truth, in
God’s way, undefined but significant ideas seemed to burst out as
though they had been locked up, and all striving towards one goal, they
thronged whirling through his head, blinding him with their light.


Chapter 12

Levin strode along the highroad, absorbed not so much in his thoughts
(he could not yet disentangle them) as in his spiritual condition,
unlike anything he had experienced before.

The words uttered by the peasant had acted on his soul like an electric
shock, suddenly transforming and combining into a single whole the
whole swarm of disjointed, impotent, separate thoughts that incessantly
occupied his mind. These thoughts had unconsciously been in his mind
even when he was talking about the land.

He was aware of something new in his soul, and joyfully tested this new
thing, not yet knowing what it was.

“Not living for his own wants, but for God? For what God? And could one
say anything more senseless than what he said? He said that one must
not live for one’s own wants, that is, that one must not live for what
we understand, what we are attracted by, what we desire, but must live
for something incomprehensible, for God, whom no one can understand nor
even define. What of it? Didn’t I understand those senseless words of
Fyodor’s? And understanding them, did I doubt of their truth? Did I
think them stupid, obscure, inexact? No, I understood him, and exactly
as he understands the words. I understood them more fully and clearly
than I understand anything in life, and never in my life have I doubted
nor can I doubt about it. And not only I, but everyone, the whole world
understands nothing fully but this, and about this only they have no
doubt and are always agreed.

“And I looked out for miracles, complained that I did not see a miracle
which would convince me. A material miracle would have persuaded me.
And here is a miracle, the sole miracle possible, continually existing,
surrounding me on all sides, and I never noticed it!

“Fyodor says that Kirillov lives for his belly. That’s comprehensible
and rational. All of us as rational beings can’t do anything else but
live for our belly. And all of a sudden the same Fyodor says that one
mustn’t live for one’s belly, but must live for truth, for God, and at
a hint I understand him! And I and millions of men, men who lived ages
ago and men living now—peasants, the poor in spirit and the learned,
who have thought and written about it, in their obscure words saying
the same thing—we are all agreed about this one thing: what we must
live for and what is good. I and all men have only one firm,
incontestable, clear knowledge, and that knowledge cannot be explained
by the reason—it is outside it, and has no causes and can have no
effects.

“If goodness has causes, it is not goodness; if it has effects, a
reward, it is not goodness either. So goodness is outside the chain of
cause and effect.

“And yet I know it, and we all know it.

“What could be a greater miracle than that?

“Can I have found the solution of it all? can my sufferings be over?”
thought Levin, striding along the dusty road, not noticing the heat nor
his weariness, and experiencing a sense of relief from prolonged
suffering. This feeling was so delicious that it seemed to him
incredible. He was breathless with emotion and incapable of going
farther; he turned off the road into the forest and lay down in the
shade of an aspen on the uncut grass. He took his hat off his hot head
and lay propped on his elbow in the lush, feathery, woodland grass.

“Yes, I must make it clear to myself and understand,” he thought,
looking intently at the untrampled grass before him, and following the
movements of a green beetle, advancing along a blade of couch-grass and
lifting up in its progress a leaf of goat-weed. “What have I
discovered?” he asked himself, bending aside the leaf of goat-weed out
of the beetle’s way and twisting another blade of grass above for the
beetle to cross over onto it. “What is it makes me glad? What have I
discovered?

“I have discovered nothing. I have only found out what I knew. I
understand the force that in the past gave me life, and now too gives
me life. I have been set free from falsity, I have found the Master.

“Of old I used to say that in my body, that in the body of this grass
and of this beetle (there, she didn’t care for the grass, she’s opened
her wings and flown away), there was going on a transformation of
matter in accordance with physical, chemical, and physiological laws.
And in all of us, as well as in the aspens and the clouds and the misty
patches, there was a process of evolution. Evolution from what? into
what?—Eternal evolution and struggle.... As though there could be any
sort of tendency and struggle in the eternal! And I was astonished that
in spite of the utmost effort of thought along that road I could not
discover the meaning of life, the meaning of my impulses and yearnings.
Now I say that I know the meaning of my life: ‘To live for God, for my
soul.’ And this meaning, in spite of its clearness, is mysterious and
marvelous. Such, indeed, is the meaning of everything existing. Yes,
pride,” he said to himself, turning over on his stomach and beginning
to tie a noose of blades of grass, trying not to break them.

“And not merely pride of intellect, but dulness of intellect. And most
of all, the deceitfulness; yes, the deceitfulness of intellect. The
cheating knavishness of intellect, that’s it,” he said to himself.

And he briefly went through, mentally, the whole course of his ideas
during the last two years, the beginning of which was the clear
confronting of death at the sight of his dear brother hopelessly ill.

Then, for the first time, grasping that for every man, and himself too,
there was nothing in store but suffering, death, and forgetfulness, he
had made up his mind that life was impossible like that, and that he
must either interpret life so that it would not present itself to him
as the evil jest of some devil, or shoot himself.

But he had not done either, but had gone on living, thinking, and
feeling, and had even at that very time married, and had had many joys
and had been happy, when he was not thinking of the meaning of his
life.

What did this mean? It meant that he had been living rightly, but
thinking wrongly.

He had lived (without being aware of it) on those spiritual truths that
he had sucked in with his mother’s milk, but he had thought, not merely
without recognition of these truths, but studiously ignoring them.

Now it was clear to him that he could only live by virtue of the
beliefs in which he had been brought up.

“What should I have been, and how should I have spent my life, if I had
not had these beliefs, if I had not known that I must live for God and
not for my own desires? I should have robbed and lied and killed.
Nothing of what makes the chief happiness of my life would have existed
for me.” And with the utmost stretch of imagination he could not
conceive the brutal creature he would have been himself, if he had not
known what he was living for.

“I looked for an answer to my question. And thought could not give an
answer to my question—it is incommensurable with my question. The
answer has been given me by life itself, in my knowledge of what is
right and what is wrong. And that knowledge I did not arrive at in any
way, it was given to me as to all men, _given_, because I could not
have got it from anywhere.

“Where could I have got it? By reason could I have arrived at knowing
that I must love my neighbor and not oppress him? I was told that in my
childhood, and I believed it gladly, for they told me what was already
in my soul. But who discovered it? Not reason. Reason discovered the
struggle for existence, and the law that requires us to oppress all who
hinder the satisfaction of our desires. That is the deduction of
reason. But loving one’s neighbor reason could never discover, because
it’s irrational.”

Chapter 13

And Levin remembered a scene he had lately witnessed between Dolly and
her children. The children, left to themselves, had begun cooking
raspberries over the candles and squirting milk into each other’s
mouths with a syringe. Their mother, catching them at these pranks,
began reminding them in Levin’s presence of the trouble their mischief
gave to the grown-up people, and that this trouble was all for their
sake, and that if they smashed the cups they would have nothing to
drink their tea out of, and that if they wasted the milk, they would
have nothing to eat, and die of hunger.

And Levin had been struck by the passive, weary incredulity with which
the children heard what their mother said to them. They were simply
annoyed that their amusing play had been interrupted, and did not
believe a word of what their mother was saying. They could not believe
it indeed, for they could not take in the immensity of all they
habitually enjoyed, and so could not conceive that what they were
destroying was the very thing they lived by.

“That all comes of itself,” they thought, “and there’s nothing
interesting or important about it because it has always been so, and
always will be so. And it’s all always the same. We’ve no need to think
about that, it’s all ready. But we want to invent something of our own,
and new. So we thought of putting raspberries in a cup, and cooking
them over a candle, and squirting milk straight into each other’s
mouths. That’s fun, and something new, and not a bit worse than
drinking out of cups.”

“Isn’t it just the same that we do, that I did, searching by the aid of
reason for the significance of the forces of nature and the meaning of
the life of man?” he thought.

“And don’t all the theories of philosophy do the same, trying by the
path of thought, which is strange and not natural to man, to bring him
to a knowledge of what he has known long ago, and knows so certainly
that he could not live at all without it? Isn’t it distinctly to be
seen in the development of each philosopher’s theory, that he knows
what is the chief significance of life beforehand, just as positively
as the peasant Fyodor, and not a bit more clearly than he, and is
simply trying by a dubious intellectual path to come back to what
everyone knows?

“Now then, leave the children to themselves to get things alone and
make their crockery, get the milk from the cows, and so on. Would they
be naughty then? Why, they’d die of hunger! Well, then, leave us with
our passions and thoughts, without any idea of the one God, of the
Creator, or without any idea of what is right, without any idea of
moral evil.

“Just try and build up anything without those ideas!

“We only try to destroy them, because we’re spiritually provided for.
Exactly like the children!

“Whence have I that joyful knowledge, shared with the peasant, that
alone gives peace to my soul? Whence did I get it?

“Brought up with an idea of God, a Christian, my whole life filled with
the spiritual blessings Christianity has given me, full of them, and
living on those blessings, like the children I did not understand them,
and destroy, that is try to destroy, what I live by. And as soon as an
important moment of life comes, like the children when they are cold
and hungry, I turn to Him, and even less than the children when their
mother scolds them for their childish mischief, do I feel that my
childish efforts at wanton madness are reckoned against me.

“Yes, what I know, I know not by reason, but it has been given to me,
revealed to me, and I know it with my heart, by faith in the chief
thing taught by the church.

“The church! the church!” Levin repeated to himself. He turned over on
the other side, and leaning on his elbow, fell to gazing into the
distance at a herd of cattle crossing over to the river.

“But can I believe in all the church teaches?” he thought, trying
himself, and thinking of everything that could destroy his present
peace of mind. Intentionally he recalled all those doctrines of the
church which had always seemed most strange and had always been a
stumbling block to him.

“The Creation? But how did I explain existence? By existence? By
nothing? The devil and sin. But how do I explain evil?... The
atonement?...

“But I know nothing, nothing, and I can know nothing but what has been
told to me and all men.”

And it seemed to him that there was not a single article of faith of
the church which could destroy the chief thing—faith in God, in
goodness, as the one goal of man’s destiny.

Under every article of faith of the church could be put the faith in
the service of truth instead of one’s desires. And each doctrine did
not simply leave that faith unshaken, each doctrine seemed essential to
complete that great miracle, continually manifest upon earth, that made
it possible for each man and millions of different sorts of men, wise
men and imbeciles, old men and children—all men, peasants, Lvov, Kitty,
beggars and kings to understand perfectly the same one thing, and to
build up thereby that life of the soul which alone is worth living, and
which alone is precious to us.

Lying on his back, he gazed up now into the high, cloudless sky. “Do I
not know that that is infinite space, and that it is not a round arch?
But, however I screw up my eyes and strain my sight, I cannot see it
not round and not bounded, and in spite of my knowing about infinite
space, I am incontestably right when I see a solid blue dome, and more
right than when I strain my eyes to see beyond it.”

Levin ceased thinking, and only, as it were, listened to mysterious
voices that seemed talking joyfully and earnestly within him.

“Can this be faith?” he thought, afraid to believe in his happiness.
“My God, I thank Thee!” he said, gulping down his sobs, and with both
hands brushing away the tears that filled his eyes.


Chapter 14

Levin looked before him and saw a herd of cattle, then he caught sight
of his trap with Raven in the shafts, and the coachman, who, driving up
to the herd, said something to the herdsman. Then he heard the rattle
of the wheels and the snort of the sleek horse close by him. But he was
so buried in his thoughts that he did not even wonder why the coachman
had come for him.

He only thought of that when the coachman had driven quite up to him
and shouted to him. “The mistress sent me. Your brother has come, and
some gentleman with him.”

Levin got into the trap and took the reins. As though just roused out
of sleep, for a long while Levin could not collect his faculties. He
stared at the sleek horse flecked with lather between his haunches and
on his neck, where the harness rubbed, stared at Ivan the coachman
sitting beside him, and remembered that he was expecting his brother,
thought that his wife was most likely uneasy at his long absence, and
tried to guess who was the visitor who had come with his brother. And
his brother and his wife and the unknown guest seemed to him now quite
different from before. He fancied that now his relations with all men
would be different.

“With my brother there will be none of that aloofness there always used
to be between us, there will be no disputes; with Kitty there shall
never be quarrels; with the visitor, whoever he may be, I will be
friendly and nice; with the servants, with Ivan, it will all be
different.”

Pulling the stiff rein and holding in the good horse that snorted with
impatience and seemed begging to be let go, Levin looked round at Ivan
sitting beside him, not knowing what to do with his unoccupied hand,
continually pressing down his shirt as it puffed out, and he tried to
find something to start a conversation about with him. He would have
said that Ivan had pulled the saddle-girth up too high, but that was
like blame, and he longed for friendly, warm talk. Nothing else
occurred to him.

“Your honor must keep to the right and mind that stump,” said the
coachman, pulling the rein Levin held.

“Please don’t touch and don’t teach me!” said Levin, angered by this
interference. Now, as always, interference made him angry, and he felt
sorrowfully at once how mistaken had been his supposition that his
spiritual condition could immediately change him in contact with
reality.

He was not a quarter of a mile from home when he saw Grisha and Tanya
running to meet him.

“Uncle Kostya! mamma’s coming, and grandfather, and Sergey Ivanovitch,
and someone else,” they said, clambering up into the trap.

“Who is he?”

“An awfully terrible person! And he does like this with his arms,” said
Tanya, getting up in the trap and mimicking Katavasov.

“Old or young?” asked Levin, laughing, reminded of someone, he did not
know whom, by Tanya’s performance.

“Oh, I hope it’s not a tiresome person!” thought Levin.

As soon as he turned, at a bend in the road, and saw the party coming,
Levin recognized Katavasov in a straw hat, walking along swinging his
arms just as Tanya had shown him. Katavasov was very fond of discussing
metaphysics, having derived his notions from natural science writers
who had never studied metaphysics, and in Moscow Levin had had many
arguments with him of late.

And one of these arguments, in which Katavasov had obviously considered
that he came off victorious, was the first thing Levin thought of as he
recognized him.

“No, whatever I do, I won’t argue and give utterance to my ideas
lightly,” he thought.

Getting out of the trap and greeting his brother and Katavasov, Levin
asked about his wife.

“She has taken Mitya to Kolok” (a copse near the house). “She meant to
have him out there because it’s so hot indoors,” said Dolly. Levin had
always advised his wife not to take the baby to the wood, thinking it
unsafe, and he was not pleased to hear this.

“She rushes about from place to place with him,” said the prince,
smiling. “I advised her to try putting him in the ice cellar.”

“She meant to come to the bee-house. She thought you would be there. We
are going there,” said Dolly.

“Well, and what are you doing?” said Sergey Ivanovitch, falling back
from the rest and walking beside him.

“Oh, nothing special. Busy as usual with the land,” answered Levin.
“Well, and what about you? Come for long? We have been expecting you
for such a long time.”

“Only for a fortnight. I’ve a great deal to do in Moscow.”

At these words the brothers’ eyes met, and Levin, in spite of the
desire he always had, stronger than ever just now, to be on
affectionate and still more open terms with his brother, felt an
awkwardness in looking at him. He dropped his eyes and did not know
what to say.

Casting over the subjects of conversation that would be pleasant to
Sergey Ivanovitch, and would keep him off the subject of the Servian
war and the Slavonic question, at which he had hinted by the allusion
to what he had to do in Moscow, Levin began to talk of Sergey
Ivanovitch’s book.

“Well, have there been reviews of your book?” he asked.

Sergey Ivanovitch smiled at the intentional character of the question.

“No one is interested in that now, and I less than anyone,” he said.
“Just look, Darya Alexandrovna, we shall have a shower,” he added,
pointing with a sunshade at the white rain clouds that showed above the
aspen tree-tops.

And these words were enough to re-establish again between the brothers
that tone—hardly hostile, but chilly—which Levin had been so longing to
avoid.

Levin went up to Katavasov.

“It was jolly of you to make up your mind to come,” he said to him.

“I’ve been meaning to a long while. Now we shall have some discussion,
we’ll see to that. Have you been reading Spencer?”

“No, I’ve not finished reading him,” said Levin. “But I don’t need him
now.”

“How’s that? that’s interesting. Why so?”

“I mean that I’m fully convinced that the solution of the problems that
interest me I shall never find in him and his like. Now....”

But Katavasov’s serene and good-humored expression suddenly struck him,
and he felt such tenderness for his own happy mood, which he was
unmistakably disturbing by this conversation, that he remembered his
resolution and stopped short.

“But we’ll talk later on,” he added. “If we’re going to the bee-house,
it’s this way, along this little path,” he said, addressing them all.

Going along the narrow path to a little uncut meadow covered on one
side with thick clumps of brilliant heart’s-ease among which stood up
here and there tall, dark green tufts of hellebore, Levin settled his
guests in the dense, cool shade of the young aspens on a bench and some
stumps purposely put there for visitors to the bee-house who might be
afraid of the bees, and he went off himself to the hut to get bread,
cucumbers, and fresh honey, to regale them with.

Trying to make his movements as deliberate as possible, and listening
to the bees that buzzed more and more frequently past him, he walked
along the little path to the hut. In the very entry one bee hummed
angrily, caught in his beard, but he carefully extricated it. Going
into the shady outer room, he took down from the wall his veil, that
hung on a peg, and putting it on, and thrusting his hands into his
pockets, he went into the fenced-in bee-garden, where there stood in
the midst of a closely mown space in regular rows, fastened with bast
on posts, all the hives he knew so well, the old stocks, each with its
own history, and along the fences the younger swarms hived that year.
In front of the openings of the hives, it made his eyes giddy to watch
the bees and drones whirling round and round about the same spot, while
among them the working bees flew in and out with spoils or in search of
them, always in the same direction into the wood to the flowering lime
trees and back to the hives.

His ears were filled with the incessant hum in various notes, now the
busy hum of the working bee flying quickly off, then the blaring of the
lazy drone, and the excited buzz of the bees on guard protecting their
property from the enemy and preparing to sting. On the farther side of
the fence the old bee-keeper was shaving a hoop for a tub, and he did
not see Levin. Levin stood still in the midst of the beehives and did
not call him.

He was glad of a chance to be alone to recover from the influence of
ordinary actual life, which had already depressed his happy mood. He
thought that he had already had time to lose his temper with Ivan, to
show coolness to his brother, and to talk flippantly with Katavasov.

“Can it have been only a momentary mood, and will it pass and leave no
trace?” he thought. But the same instant, going back to his mood, he
felt with delight that something new and important had happened to him.
Real life had only for a time overcast the spiritual peace he had
found, but it was still untouched within him.

Just as the bees, whirling round him, now menacing him and distracting
his attention, prevented him from enjoying complete physical peace,
forced him to restrain his movements to avoid them, so had the petty
cares that had swarmed about him from the moment he got into the trap
restricted his spiritual freedom; but that lasted only so long as he
was among them. Just as his bodily strength was still unaffected, in
spite of the bees, so too was the spiritual strength that he had just
become aware of.

Chapter 15

“Do you know, Kostya, with whom Sergey Ivanovitch traveled on his way
here?” said Dolly, doling out cucumbers and honey to the children;
“with Vronsky! He’s going to Servia.”

“And not alone; he’s taking a squadron out with him at his own
expense,” said Katavasov.

“That’s the right thing for him,” said Levin. “Are volunteers still
going out then?” he added, glancing at Sergey Ivanovitch.

Sergey Ivanovitch did not answer. He was carefully with a blunt knife
getting a live bee covered with sticky honey out of a cup full of white
honeycomb.

“I should think so! You should have seen what was going on at the
station yesterday!” said Katavasov, biting with a juicy sound into a
cucumber.

“Well, what is one to make of it? For mercy’s sake, do explain to me,
Sergey Ivanovitch, where are all those volunteers going, whom are they
fighting with?” asked the old prince, unmistakably taking up a
conversation that had sprung up in Levin’s absence.

“With the Turks,” Sergey Ivanovitch answered, smiling serenely, as he
extricated the bee, dark with honey and helplessly kicking, and put it
with the knife on a stout aspen leaf.

“But who has declared war on the Turks?—Ivan Ivanovitch Ragozov and
Countess Lidia Ivanovna, assisted by Madame Stahl?”

“No one has declared war, but people sympathize with their neighbors’
sufferings and are eager to help them,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.

“But the prince is not speaking of help,” said Levin, coming to the
assistance of his father-in-law, “but of war. The prince says that
private persons cannot take part in war without the permission of the
government.”

“Kostya, mind, that’s a bee! Really, they’ll sting us!” said Dolly,
waving away a wasp.

“But that’s not a bee, it’s a wasp,” said Levin.

“Well now, well, what’s your own theory?” Katavasov said to Levin with
a smile, distinctly challenging him to a discussion. “Why have not
private persons the right to do so?”

“Oh, my theory’s this: war is on one side such a beastly, cruel, and
awful thing, that no one man, not to speak of a Christian, can
individually take upon himself the responsibility of beginning wars;
that can only be done by a government, which is called upon to do this,
and is driven inevitably into war. On the other hand, both political
science and common sense teach us that in matters of state, and
especially in the matter of war, private citizens must forego their
personal individual will.”

Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had their replies ready, and both began
speaking at the same time.

“But the point is, my dear fellow, that there may be cases when the
government does not carry out the will of the citizens and then the
public asserts its will,” said Katavasov.

But evidently Sergey Ivanovitch did not approve of this answer. His
brows contracted at Katavasov’s words and he said something else.

“You don’t put the matter in its true light. There is no question here
of a declaration of war, but simply the expression of a human Christian
feeling. Our brothers, one with us in religion and in race, are being
massacred. Even supposing they were not our brothers nor
fellow-Christians, but simply children, women, old people, feeling is
aroused and Russians go eagerly to help in stopping these atrocities.
Fancy, if you were going along the street and saw drunken men beating a
woman or a child—I imagine you would not stop to inquire whether war
had been declared on the men, but would throw yourself on them, and
protect the victim.”

“But I should not kill them,” said Levin.

“Yes, you would kill them.”

“I don’t know. If I saw that, I might give way to my impulse of the
moment, but I can’t say beforehand. And such a momentary impulse there
is not, and there cannot be, in the case of the oppression of the
Slavonic peoples.”

“Possibly for you there is not; but for others there is,” said Sergey
Ivanovitch, frowning with displeasure. “There are traditions still
extant among the people of Slavs of the true faith suffering under the
yoke of the ‘unclean sons of Hagar.’ The people have heard of the
sufferings of their brethren and have spoken.”

“Perhaps so,” said Levin evasively; “but I don’t see it. I’m one of the
people myself, and I don’t feel it.”

“Here am I too,” said the old prince. “I’ve been staying abroad and
reading the papers, and I must own, up to the time of the Bulgarian
atrocities, I couldn’t make out why it was all the Russians were all of
a sudden so fond of their Slavonic brethren, while I didn’t feel the
slightest affection for them. I was very much upset, thought I was a
monster, or that it was the influence of Carlsbad on me. But since I
have been here, my mind’s been set at rest. I see that there are people
besides me who’re only interested in Russia, and not in their Slavonic
brethren. Here’s Konstantin too.”

“Personal opinions mean nothing in such a case,” said Sergey
Ivanovitch; “it’s not a matter of personal opinions when all Russia—the
whole people—has expressed its will.”

“But excuse me, I don’t see that. The people don’t know anything about
it, if you come to that,” said the old prince.

“Oh, papa!... how can you say that? And last Sunday in church?” said
Dolly, listening to the conversation. “Please give me a cloth,” she
said to the old man, who was looking at the children with a smile.
“Why, it’s not possible that all....”

“But what was it in church on Sunday? The priest had been told to read
that. He read it. They didn’t understand a word of it. Then they were
told that there was to be a collection for a pious object in church;
well, they pulled out their halfpence and gave them, but what for they
couldn’t say.”

“The people cannot help knowing; the sense of their own destinies is
always in the people, and at such moments as the present that sense
finds utterance,” said Sergey Ivanovitch with conviction, glancing at
the old bee-keeper.

The handsome old man, with black grizzled beard and thick silvery hair,
stood motionless, holding a cup of honey, looking down from the height
of his tall figure with friendly serenity at the gentlefolk, obviously
understanding nothing of their conversation and not caring to
understand it.

“That’s so, no doubt,” he said, with a significant shake of his head at
Sergey Ivanovitch’s words.

“Here, then, ask him. He knows nothing about it and thinks nothing,”
said Levin. “Have you heard about the war, Mihalitch?” he said, turning
to him. “What they read in the church? What do you think about it?
Ought we to fight for the Christians?”

“What should we think? Alexander Nikolaevitch our Emperor has thought
for us; he thinks for us indeed in all things. It’s clearer for him to
see. Shall I bring a bit more bread? Give the little lad some more?” he
said addressing Darya Alexandrovna and pointing to Grisha, who had
finished his crust.

“I don’t need to ask,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, “we have seen and are
seeing hundreds and hundreds of people who give up everything to serve
a just cause, come from every part of Russia, and directly and clearly
express their thought and aim. They bring their halfpence or go
themselves and say directly what for. What does it mean?”

“It means, to my thinking,” said Levin, who was beginning to get warm,
“that among eighty millions of people there can always be found not
hundreds, as now, but tens of thousands of people who have lost caste,
ne’er-do-wells, who are always ready to go anywhere—to Pogatchev’s
bands, to Khiva, to Servia....”

“I tell you that it’s not a case of hundreds or of ne’er-do-wells, but
the best representatives of the people!” said Sergey Ivanovitch, with
as much irritation as if he were defending the last penny of his
fortune. “And what of the subscriptions? In this case it is a whole
people directly expressing their will.”

“That word ‘people’ is so vague,” said Levin. “Parish clerks, teachers,
and one in a thousand of the peasants, maybe, know what it’s all about.
The rest of the eighty millions, like Mihalitch, far from expressing
their will, haven’t the faintest idea what there is for them to express
their will about. What right have we to say that this is the people’s
will?”

Chapter 16

Sergey Ivanovitch, being practiced in argument, did not reply, but at
once turned the conversation to another aspect of the subject.

“Oh, if you want to learn the spirit of the people by arithmetical
computation, of course it’s very difficult to arrive at it. And voting
has not been introduced among us and cannot be introduced, for it does
not express the will of the people; but there are other ways of
reaching that. It is felt in the air, it is felt by the heart. I won’t
speak of those deep currents which are astir in the still ocean of the
people, and which are evident to every unprejudiced man; let us look at
society in the narrow sense. All the most diverse sections of the
educated public, hostile before, are merged in one. Every division is
at an end, all the public organs say the same thing over and over
again, all feel the mighty torrent that has overtaken them and is
carrying them in one direction.”

“Yes, all the newspapers do say the same thing,” said the prince.
“That’s true. But so it is the same thing that all the frogs croak
before a storm. One can hear nothing for them.”

“Frogs or no frogs, I’m not the editor of a paper and I don’t want to
defend them; but I am speaking of the unanimity in the intellectual
world,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, addressing his brother. Levin would
have answered, but the old prince interrupted him.

“Well, about that unanimity, that’s another thing, one may say,” said
the prince. “There’s my son-in-law, Stepan Arkadyevitch, you know him.
He’s got a place now on the committee of a commission and something or
other, I don’t remember. Only there’s nothing to do in it—why, Dolly,
it’s no secret!—and a salary of eight thousand. You try asking him
whether his post is of use, he’ll prove to you that it’s most
necessary. And he’s a truthful man too, but there’s no refusing to
believe in the utility of eight thousand roubles.”

“Yes, he asked me to give a message to Darya Alexandrovna about the
post,” said Sergey Ivanovitch reluctantly, feeling the prince’s remark
to be ill-timed.

“So it is with the unanimity of the press. That’s been explained to me:
as soon as there’s war their incomes are doubled. How can they help
believing in the destinies of the people and the Slavonic races ... and
all that?”

“I don’t care for many of the papers, but that’s unjust,” said Sergey
Ivanovitch.

“I would only make one condition,” pursued the old prince. “Alphonse
Karr said a capital thing before the war with Prussia: ‘You consider
war to be inevitable? Very good. Let everyone who advocates war be
enrolled in a special regiment of advance-guards, for the front of
every storm, of every attack, to lead them all!’”

“A nice lot the editors would make!” said Katavasov, with a loud roar,
as he pictured the editors he knew in this picked legion.

“But they’d run,” said Dolly, “they’d only be in the way.”

“Oh, if they ran away, then we’d have grape-shot or Cossacks with whips
behind them,” said the prince.

“But that’s a joke, and a poor one too, if you’ll excuse my saying so,
prince,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.

“I don’t see that it was a joke, that....” Levin was beginning, but
Sergey Ivanovitch interrupted him.

“Every member of society is called upon to do his own special work,”
said he. “And men of thought are doing their work when they express
public opinion. And the single-hearted and full expression of public
opinion is the service of the press and a phenomenon to rejoice us at
the same time. Twenty years ago we should have been silent, but now we
have heard the voice of the Russian people, which is ready to rise as
one man and ready to sacrifice itself for its oppressed brethren; that
is a great step and a proof of strength.”

“But it’s not only making a sacrifice, but killing Turks,” said Levin
timidly. “The people make sacrifices and are ready to make sacrifices
for their soul, but not for murder,” he added, instinctively connecting
the conversation with the ideas that had been absorbing his mind.

“For their soul? That’s a most puzzling expression for a natural
science man, do you understand? What sort of thing is the soul?” said
Katavasov, smiling.

“Oh, you know!”

“No, by God, I haven’t the faintest idea!” said Katavasov with a loud
roar of laughter.

“‘I bring not peace, but a sword,’ says Christ,” Sergey Ivanovitch
rejoined for his part, quoting as simply as though it were the easiest
thing to understand the very passage that had always puzzled Levin
most.

“That’s so, no doubt,” the old man repeated again. He was standing near
them and responded to a chance glance turned in his direction.

“Ah, my dear fellow, you’re defeated, utterly defeated!” cried
Katavasov good-humoredly.

Levin reddened with vexation, not at being defeated, but at having
failed to control himself and being drawn into argument.

“No, I can’t argue with them,” he thought; “they wear impenetrable
armor, while I’m naked.”

He saw that it was impossible to convince his brother and Katavasov,
and he saw even less possibility of himself agreeing with them. What
they advocated was the very pride of intellect that had almost been his
ruin. He could not admit that some dozens of men, among them his
brother, had the right, on the ground of what they were told by some
hundreds of glib volunteers swarming to the capital, to say that they
and the newspapers were expressing the will and feeling of the people,
and a feeling which was expressed in vengeance and murder. He could not
admit this, because he neither saw the expression of such feelings in
the people among whom he was living, nor found them in himself (and he
could not but consider himself one of the persons making up the Russian
people), and most of all because he, like the people, did not know and
could not know what is for the general good, though he knew beyond a
doubt that this general good could be attained only by the strict
observance of that law of right and wrong which has been revealed to
every man, and therefore he could not wish for war or advocate war for
any general objects whatever. He said as Mihalitch did and the people,
who had expressed their feeling in the traditional invitations of the
Varyagi: “Be princes and rule over us. Gladly we promise complete
submission. All the labor, all humiliations, all sacrifices we take
upon ourselves; but we will not judge and decide.” And now, according
to Sergey Ivanovitch’s account, the people had foregone this privilege
they had bought at such a costly price.

He wanted to say too that if public opinion were an infallible guide,
then why were not revolutions and the commune as lawful as the movement
in favor of the Slavonic peoples? But these were merely thoughts that
could settle nothing. One thing could be seen beyond doubt—that was
that at the actual moment the discussion was irritating Sergey
Ivanovitch, and so it was wrong to continue it. And Levin ceased
speaking and then called the attention of his guests to the fact that
the storm clouds were gathering, and that they had better be going home
before it rained.


Chapter 17

The old prince and Sergey Ivanovitch got into the trap and drove off;
the rest of the party hastened homewards on foot.

But the storm-clouds, turning white and then black, moved down so
quickly that they had to quicken their pace to get home before the
rain. The foremost clouds, lowering and black as soot-laden smoke,
rushed with extraordinary swiftness over the sky. They were still two
hundred paces from home and a gust of wind had already blown up, and
every second the downpour might be looked for.

The children ran ahead with frightened and gleeful shrieks. Darya
Alexandrovna, struggling painfully with her skirts that clung round her
legs, was not walking, but running, her eyes fixed on the children. The
men of the party, holding their hats on, strode with long steps beside
her. They were just at the steps when a big drop fell splashing on the
edge of the iron guttering. The children and their elders after them
ran into the shelter of the house, talking merrily.

“Katerina Alexandrovna?” Levin asked of Agafea Mihalovna, who met them
with kerchiefs and rugs in the hall.

“We thought she was with you,” she said.

“And Mitya?”

“In the copse, he must be, and the nurse with him.”

Levin snatched up the rugs and ran towards the copse.

In that brief interval of time the storm clouds had moved on, covering
the sun so completely that it was dark as an eclipse. Stubbornly, as
though insisting on its rights, the wind stopped Levin, and tearing the
leaves and flowers off the lime trees and stripping the white birch
branches into strange unseemly nakedness, it twisted everything on one
side—acacias, flowers, burdocks, long grass, and tall tree-tops. The
peasant girls working in the garden ran shrieking into shelter in the
servants’ quarters. The streaming rain had already flung its white veil
over all the distant forest and half the fields close by, and was
rapidly swooping down upon the copse. The wet of the rain spurting up
in tiny drops could be smelt in the air.

Holding his head bent down before him, and struggling with the wind
that strove to tear the wraps away from him, Levin was moving up to the
copse and had just caught sight of something white behind the oak tree,
when there was a sudden flash, the whole earth seemed on fire, and the
vault of heaven seemed crashing overhead. Opening his blinded eyes,
Levin gazed through the thick veil of rain that separated him now from
the copse, and to his horror the first thing he saw was the green crest
of the familiar oak-tree in the middle of the copse uncannily changing
its position. “Can it have been struck?” Levin hardly had time to think
when, moving more and more rapidly, the oak tree vanished behind the
other trees, and he heard the crash of the great tree falling upon the
others.

The flash of lightning, the crash of thunder, and the instantaneous
chill that ran through him were all merged for Levin in one sense of
terror.

“My God! my God! not on them!” he said.

And though he thought at once how senseless was his prayer that they
should not have been killed by the oak which had fallen now, he
repeated it, knowing that he could do nothing better than utter this
senseless prayer.

Running up to the place where they usually went, he did not find them
there.

They were at the other end of the copse under an old lime-tree; they
were calling him. Two figures in dark dresses (they had been light
summer dresses when they started out) were standing bending over
something. It was Kitty with the nurse. The rain was already ceasing,
and it was beginning to get light when Levin reached them. The nurse
was not wet on the lower part of her dress, but Kitty was drenched
through, and her soaked clothes clung to her. Though the rain was over,
they still stood in the same position in which they had been standing
when the storm broke. Both stood bending over a perambulator with a
green umbrella.

“Alive? Unhurt? Thank God!” he said, splashing with his soaked boots
through the standing water and running up to them.

Kitty’s rosy wet face was turned towards him, and she smiled timidly
under her shapeless sopped hat.

“Aren’t you ashamed of yourself? I can’t think how you can be so
reckless!” he said angrily to his wife.

“It wasn’t my fault, really. We were just meaning to go, when he made
such a to-do that we had to change him. We were just....” Kitty began
defending herself.

Mitya was unharmed, dry, and still fast asleep.

“Well, thank God! I don’t know what I’m saying!”

They gathered up the baby’s wet belongings; the nurse picked up the
baby and carried it. Levin walked beside his wife, and, penitent for
having been angry, he squeezed her hand when the nurse was not looking.


Chapter 18

During the whole of that day, in the extremely different conversations
in which he took part, only as it were with the top layer of his mind,
in spite of the disappointment of not finding the change he expected in
himself, Levin had been all the while joyfully conscious of the fulness
of his heart.

After the rain it was too wet to go for a walk; besides, the storm
clouds still hung about the horizon, and gathered here and there, black
and thundery, on the rim of the sky. The whole party spent the rest of
the day in the house.

No more discussions sprang up; on the contrary, after dinner everyone
was in the most amiable frame of mind.

At first Katavasov amused the ladies by his original jokes, which
always pleased people on their first acquaintance with him. Then Sergey
Ivanovitch induced him to tell them about the very interesting
observations he had made on the habits and characteristics of common
houseflies, and their life. Sergey Ivanovitch, too, was in good
spirits, and at tea his brother drew him on to explain his views of the
future of the Eastern question, and he spoke so simply and so well,
that everyone listened eagerly.

Kitty was the only one who did not hear it all—she was summoned to give
Mitya his bath.

A few minutes after Kitty had left the room she sent for Levin to come
to the nursery.

Leaving his tea, and regretfully interrupting the interesting
conversation, and at the same time uneasily wondering why he had been
sent for, as this only happened on important occasions, Levin went to
the nursery.

Although he had been much interested by Sergey Ivanovitch’s views of
the new epoch in history that would be created by the emancipation of
forty millions of men of Slavonic race acting with Russia, a conception
quite new to him, and although he was disturbed by uneasy wonder at
being sent for by Kitty, as soon as he came out of the drawing-room and
was alone, his mind reverted at once to the thoughts of the morning.
And all the theories of the significance of the Slav element in the
history of the world seemed to him so trivial compared with what was
passing in his own soul, that he instantly forgot it all and dropped
back into the same frame of mind that he had been in that morning.

He did not, as he had done at other times, recall the whole train of
thought—that he did not need. He fell back at once into the feeling
which had guided him, which was connected with those thoughts, and he
found that feeling in his soul even stronger and more definite than
before. He did not, as he had had to do with previous attempts to find
comforting arguments, need to revive a whole chain of thought to find
the feeling. Now, on the contrary, the feeling of joy and peace was
keener than ever, and thought could not keep pace with feeling.

He walked across the terrace and looked at two stars that had come out
in the darkening sky, and suddenly he remembered. “Yes, looking at the
sky, I thought that the dome that I see is not a deception, and then I
thought something, I shirked facing something,” he mused. “But whatever
it was, there can be no disproving it! I have but to think, and all
will come clear!”

Just as he was going into the nursery he remembered what it was he had
shirked facing. It was that if the chief proof of the Divinity was His
revelation of what is right, how is it this revelation is confined to
the Christian church alone? What relation to this revelation have the
beliefs of the Buddhists, Mohammedans, who preached and did good too?

It seemed to him that he had an answer to this question; but he had not
time to formulate it to himself before he went into the nursery.

Kitty was standing with her sleeves tucked up over the baby in the
bath. Hearing her husband’s footstep, she turned towards him, summoning
him to her with her smile. With one hand she was supporting the fat
baby that lay floating and sprawling on its back, while with the other
she squeezed the sponge over him.

“Come, look, look!” she said, when her husband came up to her. “Agafea
Mihalovna’s right. He knows us!”

Mitya had on that day given unmistakable, incontestable signs of
recognizing all his friends.

As soon as Levin approached the bath, the experiment was tried, and it
was completely successful. The cook, sent for with this object, bent
over the baby. He frowned and shook his head disapprovingly. Kitty bent
down to him, he gave her a beaming smile, propped his little hands on
the sponge and chirruped, making such a queer little contented sound
with his lips, that Kitty and the nurse were not alone in their
admiration. Levin, too, was surprised and delighted.

The baby was taken out of the bath, drenched with water, wrapped in
towels, dried, and after a piercing scream, handed to his mother.

“Well, I am glad you are beginning to love him,” said Kitty to her
husband, when she had settled herself comfortably in her usual place,
with the baby at her breast. “I am so glad! It had begun to distress
me. You said you had no feeling for him.”

“No; did I say that? I only said I was disappointed.”

“What! disappointed in him?”

“Not disappointed in him, but in my own feeling; I had expected more. I
had expected a rush of new delightful emotion to come as a surprise.
And then instead of that—disgust, pity....”

She listened attentively, looking at him over the baby, while she put
back on her slender fingers the rings she had taken off while giving
Mitya his bath.

“And most of all, at there being far more apprehension and pity than
pleasure. Today, after that fright during the storm, I understand how I
love him.”

Kitty’s smile was radiant.

“Were you very much frightened?” she said. “So was I too, but I feel it
more now that it’s over. I’m going to look at the oak. How nice
Katavasov is! And what a happy day we’ve had altogether. And you’re so
nice with Sergey Ivanovitch, when you care to be.... Well, go back to
them. It’s always so hot and steamy here after the bath.”


Chapter 19

Going out of the nursery and being again alone, Levin went back at once
to the thought, in which there was something not clear.

Instead of going into the drawing-room, where he heard voices, he
stopped on the terrace, and leaning his elbows on the parapet, he gazed
up at the sky.

It was quite dark now, and in the south, where he was looking, there
were no clouds. The storm had drifted on to the opposite side of the
sky, and there were flashes of lightning and distant thunder from that
quarter. Levin listened to the monotonous drip from the lime trees in
the garden, and looked at the triangle of stars he knew so well, and
the Milky Way with its branches that ran through its midst. At each
flash of lightning the Milky Way, and even the bright stars, vanished,
but as soon as the lightning died away, they reappeared in their places
as though some hand had flung them back with careful aim.

“Well, what is it perplexes me?” Levin said to himself, feeling
beforehand that the solution of his difficulties was ready in his soul,
though he did not know it yet. “Yes, the one unmistakable,
incontestable manifestation of the Divinity is the law of right and
wrong, which has come into the world by revelation, and which I feel in
myself, and in the recognition of which—I don’t make myself, but
whether I will or not—I am made one with other men in one body of
believers, which is called the church. Well, but the Jews, the
Mohammedans, the Confucians, the Buddhists—what of them?” he put to
himself the question he had feared to face. “Can these hundreds of
millions of men be deprived of that highest blessing without which life
has no meaning?” He pondered a moment, but immediately corrected
himself. “But what am I questioning?” he said to himself. “I am
questioning the relation to Divinity of all the different religions of
all mankind. I am questioning the universal manifestation of God to all
the world with all those misty blurs. What am I about? To me
individually, to my heart has been revealed a knowledge beyond all
doubt, and unattainable by reason, and here I am obstinately trying to
express that knowledge in reason and words.

“Don’t I know that the stars don’t move?” he asked himself, gazing at
the bright planet which had shifted its position up to the topmost twig
of the birch-tree. “But looking at the movements of the stars, I can’t
picture to myself the rotation of the earth, and I’m right in saying
that the stars move.

“And could the astronomers have understood and calculated anything, if
they had taken into account all the complicated and varied motions of
the earth? All the marvelous conclusions they have reached about the
distances, weights, movements, and deflections of the heavenly bodies
are only founded on the apparent motions of the heavenly bodies about a
stationary earth, on that very motion I see before me now, which has
been so for millions of men during long ages, and was and will be
always alike, and can always be trusted. And just as the conclusions of
the astronomers would have been vain and uncertain if not founded on
observations of the seen heavens, in relation to a single meridian and
a single horizon, so would my conclusions be vain and uncertain if not
founded on that conception of right, which has been and will be always
alike for all men, which has been revealed to me as a Christian, and
which can always be trusted in my soul. The question of other religions
and their relations to Divinity I have no right to decide, and no
possibility of deciding.”

“Oh, you haven’t gone in then?” he heard Kitty’s voice all at once, as
she came by the same way to the drawing-room.

“What is it? you’re not worried about anything?” she said, looking
intently at his face in the starlight.

But she could not have seen his face if a flash of lightning had not
hidden the stars and revealed it. In that flash she saw his face
distinctly, and seeing him calm and happy, she smiled at him.

“She understands,” he thought; “she knows what I’m thinking about.
Shall I tell her or not? Yes, I’ll tell her.” But at the moment he was
about to speak, she began speaking.

“Kostya! do something for me,” she said; “go into the corner room and
see if they’ve made it all right for Sergey Ivanovitch. I can’t very
well. See if they’ve put the new wash stand in it.”

“Very well, I’ll go directly,” said Levin, standing up and kissing her.

“No, I’d better not speak of it,” he thought, when she had gone in
before him. “It is a secret for me alone, of vital importance for me,
and not to be put into words.

“This new feeling has not changed me, has not made me happy and
enlightened all of a sudden, as I had dreamed, just like the feeling
for my child. There was no surprise in this either. Faith—or not
faith—I don’t know what it is—but this feeling has come just as
imperceptibly through suffering, and has taken firm root in my soul.

“I shall go on in the same way, losing my temper with Ivan the
coachman, falling into angry discussions, expressing my opinions
tactlessly; there will be still the same wall between the holy of
holies of my soul and other people, even my wife; I shall still go on
scolding her for my own terror, and being remorseful for it; I shall
still be as unable to understand with my reason why I pray, and I shall
still go on praying; but my life now, my whole life apart from anything
that can happen to me, every minute of it is no more meaningless, as it
was before, but it has the positive meaning of goodness, which I have
the power to put into it.”

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANNA KARENINA ***

Title: The Yellow Wallpaper

Author: Charlotte Perkins Gilman

Release Date: November, 1999 [eBook #1952]
[Most recently updated: January 4, 2021]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: An Anonymous Volunteer and David Widger

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YELLOW WALLPAPER ***




The Yellow Wallpaper

By Charlotte Perkins Gilman


It is very seldom that mere ordinary people like John and myself secure
ancestral halls for the summer.

A colonial mansion, a hereditary estate, I would say a haunted house,
and reach the height of romantic felicity—but that would be asking too
much of fate!

Still I will proudly declare that there is something queer about it.

Else, why should it be let so cheaply? And why have stood so long
untenanted?

John laughs at me, of course, but one expects that in marriage.

John is practical in the extreme. He has no patience with faith, an
intense horror of superstition, and he scoffs openly at any talk of
things not to be felt and seen and put down in figures.

John is a physician, and perhaps—(I would not say it to a living soul,
of course, but this is dead paper and a great relief to my
mind)—perhaps that is one reason I do not get well faster.

You see, he does not believe I am sick!

And what can one do?

If a physician of high standing, and one’s own husband, assures friends
and relatives that there is really nothing the matter with one but
temporary nervous depression—a slight hysterical tendency—what is one
to do?

My brother is also a physician, and also of high standing, and he says
the same thing.

So I take phosphates or phosphites—whichever it is, and tonics, and
journeys, and air, and exercise, and am absolutely forbidden to “work”
until I am well again.

Personally, I disagree with their ideas.

Personally, I believe that congenial work, with excitement and change,
would do me good.

But what is one to do?

I did write for a while in spite of them; but it does exhaust me a good
deal—having to be so sly about it, or else meet with heavy opposition.

I sometimes fancy that in my condition if I had less opposition and
more society and stimulus—but John says the very worst thing I can do
is to think about my condition, and I confess it always makes me feel
bad.

So I will let it alone and talk about the house.

The most beautiful place! It is quite alone, standing well back from
the road, quite three miles from the village. It makes me think of
English places that you read about, for there are hedges and walls and
gates that lock, and lots of separate little houses for the gardeners
and people.

There is a delicious garden! I never saw such a garden—large and shady,
full of box-bordered paths, and lined with long grape-covered arbors
with seats under them.

There were greenhouses, too, but they are all broken now.

There was some legal trouble, I believe, something about the heirs and
co-heirs; anyhow, the place has been empty for years.

That spoils my ghostliness, I am afraid; but I don’t care—there is
something strange about the house—I can feel it.

I even said so to John one moonlight evening, but he said what I felt
was a draught, and shut the window.

I get unreasonably angry with John sometimes. I’m sure I never used to
be so sensitive. I think it is due to this nervous condition.

But John says if I feel so I shall neglect proper self-control; so I
take pains to control myself,—before him, at least,—and that makes me
very tired.

I don’t like our room a bit. I wanted one downstairs that opened on the
piazza and had roses all over the window, and such pretty old-fashioned
chintz hangings! but John would not hear of it.

He said there was only one window and not room for two beds, and no
near room for him if he took another.

He is very careful and loving, and hardly lets me stir without special
direction.

I have a schedule prescription for each hour in the day; he takes all
care from me, and so I feel basely ungrateful not to value it more.

He said we came here solely on my account, that I was to have perfect
rest and all the air I could get. “Your exercise depends on your
strength, my dear,” said he, “and your food somewhat on your appetite;
but air you can absorb all the time.” So we took the nursery, at the
top of the house.

It is a big, airy room, the whole floor nearly, with windows that look
all ways, and air and sunshine galore. It was nursery first and then
playground and gymnasium, I should judge; for the windows are barred
for little children, and there are rings and things in the walls.

The paint and paper look as if a boys’ school had used it. It is
stripped off—the paper—in great patches all around the head of my bed,
about as far as I can reach, and in a great place on the other side of
the room low down. I never saw a worse paper in my life.

One of those sprawling flamboyant patterns committing every artistic
sin.

It is dull enough to confuse the eye in following, pronounced enough to
constantly irritate, and provoke study, and when you follow the lame,
uncertain curves for a little distance they suddenly commit
suicide—plunge off at outrageous angles, destroy themselves in
unheard-of contradictions.

The color is repellant, almost revolting; a smouldering, unclean
yellow, strangely faded by the slow-turning sunlight.

It is a dull yet lurid orange in some places, a sickly sulphur tint in
others.

No wonder the children hated it! I should hate it myself if I had to
live in this room long.

There comes John, and I must put this away,—he hates to have me write a
word.

We have been here two weeks, and I haven’t felt like writing before,
since that first day.

I am sitting by the window now, up in this atrocious nursery, and there
is nothing to hinder my writing as much as I please, save lack of
strength.

John is away all day, and even some nights when his cases are serious.

I am glad my case is not serious!

But these nervous troubles are dreadfully depressing.

John does not know how much I really suffer. He knows there is no
reason to suffer, and that satisfies him.

Of course it is only nervousness. It does weigh on me so not to do my
duty in any way!

I meant to be such a help to John, such a real rest and comfort, and
here I am a comparative burden already!

Nobody would believe what an effort it is to do what little I am
able—to dress and entertain, and order things.

It is fortunate Mary is so good with the baby. Such a dear baby!

And yet I cannot be with him, it makes me so nervous.

I suppose John never was nervous in his life. He laughs at me so about
this wallpaper!

At first he meant to repaper the room, but afterwards he said that I
was letting it get the better of me, and that nothing was worse for a
nervous patient than to give way to such fancies.

He said that after the wallpaper was changed it would be the heavy
bedstead, and then the barred windows, and then that gate at the head
of the stairs, and so on.

“You know the place is doing you good,” he said, “and really, dear, I
don’t care to renovate the house just for a three months’ rental.”

“Then do let us go downstairs,” I said, “there are such pretty rooms
there.”

Then he took me in his arms and called me a blessed little goose, and
said he would go down cellar if I wished, and have it whitewashed into
the bargain.

But he is right enough about the beds and windows and things.

It is as airy and comfortable a room as any one need wish, and, of
course, I would not be so silly as to make him uncomfortable just for a
whim.

I’m really getting quite fond of the big room, all but that horrid
paper.

Out of one window I can see the garden, those mysterious deep-shaded
arbors, the riotous old-fashioned flowers, and bushes and gnarly trees.

Out of another I get a lovely view of the bay and a little private
wharf belonging to the estate. There is a beautiful shaded lane that
runs down there from the house. I always fancy I see people walking in
these numerous paths and arbors, but John has cautioned me not to give
way to fancy in the least. He says that with my imaginative power and
habit of story-making a nervous weakness like mine is sure to lead to
all manner of excited fancies, and that I ought to use my will and good
sense to check the tendency. So I try.

I think sometimes that if I were only well enough to write a little it
would relieve the press of ideas and rest me.

But I find I get pretty tired when I try.

It is so discouraging not to have any advice and companionship about my
work. When I get really well John says we will ask Cousin Henry and
Julia down for a long visit; but he says he would as soon put
fire-works in my pillow-case as to let me have those stimulating people
about now.

I wish I could get well faster.

But I must not think about that. This paper looks to me as if it knew
what a vicious influence it had!

There is a recurrent spot where the pattern lolls like a broken neck
and two bulbous eyes stare at you upside-down.

I get positively angry with the impertinence of it and the
everlastingness. Up and down and sideways they crawl, and those absurd,
unblinking eyes are everywhere. There is one place where two breadths
didn’t match, and the eyes go all up and down the line, one a little
higher than the other.

I never saw so much expression in an inanimate thing before, and we all
know how much expression they have! I used to lie awake as a child and
get more entertainment and terror out of blank walls and plain
furniture than most children could find in a toy-store.

I remember what a kindly wink the knobs of our big old bureau used to
have, and there was one chair that always seemed like a strong friend.

I used to feel that if any of the other things looked too fierce I
could always hop into that chair and be safe.

The furniture in this room is no worse than inharmonious, however, for
we had to bring it all from downstairs. I suppose when this was used as
a playroom they had to take the nursery things out, and no wonder! I
never saw such ravages as the children have made here.

The wallpaper, as I said before, is torn off in spots, and it sticketh
closer than a brother—they must have had perseverance as well as
hatred.

Then the floor is scratched and gouged and splintered, the plaster
itself is dug out here and there, and this great heavy bed, which is
all we found in the room, looks as if it had been through the wars.

But I don’t mind it a bit—only the paper.

There comes John’s sister. Such a dear girl as she is, and so careful
of me! I must not let her find me writing.

She is a perfect, and enthusiastic housekeeper, and hopes for no better
profession. I verily believe she thinks it is the writing which made me
sick!

But I can write when she is out, and see her a long way off from these
windows.

There is one that commands the road, a lovely, shaded, winding road,
and one that just looks off over the country. A lovely country, too,
full of great elms and velvet meadows.

This wallpaper has a kind of sub-pattern in a different shade, a
particularly irritating one, for you can only see it in certain lights,
and not clearly then.

But in the places where it isn’t faded, and where the sun is just so, I
can see a strange, provoking, formless sort of figure, that seems to
sulk about behind that silly and conspicuous front design.

There’s sister on the stairs!

Well, the Fourth of July is over! The people are gone and I am tired
out. John thought it might do me good to see a little company, so we
just had mother and Nellie and the children down for a week.

Of course I didn’t do a thing. Jennie sees to everything now.

But it tired me all the same.

John says if I don’t pick up faster he shall send me to Weir Mitchell
in the fall.

But I don’t want to go there at all. I had a friend who was in his
hands once, and she says he is just like John and my brother, only more
so!

Besides, it is such an undertaking to go so far.

I don’t feel as if it was worth while to turn my hand over for
anything, and I’m getting dreadfully fretful and querulous.

I cry at nothing, and cry most of the time.

Of course I don’t when John is here, or anybody else, but when I am
alone.

And I am alone a good deal just now. John is kept in town very often by
serious cases, and Jennie is good and lets me alone when I want her to.

So I walk a little in the garden or down that lovely lane, sit on the
porch under the roses, and lie down up here a good deal.

I’m getting really fond of the room in spite of the wallpaper. Perhaps
because of the wallpaper.

It dwells in my mind so!

I lie here on this great immovable bed—it is nailed down, I believe—and
follow that pattern about by the hour. It is as good as gymnastics, I
assure you. I start, we’ll say, at the bottom, down in the corner over
there where it has not been touched, and I determine for the thousandth
time that I will follow that pointless pattern to some sort of a
conclusion.

I know a little of the principle of design, and I know this thing was
not arranged on any laws of radiation, or alternation, or repetition,
or symmetry, or anything else that I ever heard of.

It is repeated, of course, by the breadths, but not otherwise.

Looked at in one way each breadth stands alone, the bloated curves and
flourishes—a kind of “debased Romanesque” with delirium tremens—go
waddling up and down in isolated columns of fatuity.

But, on the other hand, they connect diagonally, and the sprawling
outlines run off in great slanting waves of optic horror, like a lot of
wallowing seaweeds in full chase.

The whole thing goes horizontally, too, at least it seems so, and I
exhaust myself in trying to distinguish the order of its going in that
direction.

They have used a horizontal breadth for a frieze, and that adds
wonderfully to the confusion.

There is one end of the room where it is almost intact, and there, when
the cross-lights fade and the low sun shines directly upon it, I can
almost fancy radiation after all,—the interminable grotesques seem to
form around a common centre and rush off in headlong plunges of equal
distraction.

It makes me tired to follow it. I will take a nap, I guess.

I don’t know why I should write this.

I don’t want to.

I don’t feel able.

And I know John would think it absurd. But I must say what I feel and
think in some way—it is such a relief!

But the effort is getting to be greater than the relief.

Half the time now I am awfully lazy, and lie down ever so much.

John says I musn’t lose my strength, and has me take cod-liver oil and
lots of tonics and things, to say nothing of ale and wine and rare
meat.

Dear John! He loves me very dearly, and hates to have me sick. I tried
to have a real earnest reasonable talk with him the other day, and tell
him how I wish he would let me go and make a visit to Cousin Henry and
Julia.

But he said I wasn’t able to go, nor able to stand it after I got
there; and I did not make out a very good case for myself, for I was
crying before I had finished.

It is getting to be a great effort for me to think straight. Just this
nervous weakness, I suppose.

And dear John gathered me up in his arms, and just carried me upstairs
and laid me on the bed, and sat by me and read to me till it tired my
head.

He said I was his darling and his comfort and all he had, and that I
must take care of myself for his sake, and keep well.

He says no one but myself can help me out of it, that I must use my
will and self-control and not let any silly fancies run away with me.

There’s one comfort, the baby is well and happy, and does not have to
occupy this nursery with the horrid wallpaper.

If we had not used it that blessed child would have! What a fortunate
escape! Why, I wouldn’t have a child of mine, an impressionable little
thing, live in such a room for worlds.

I never thought of it before, but it is lucky that John kept me here
after all. I can stand it so much easier than a baby, you see.

Of course I never mention it to them any more,—I am too wise,—but I
keep watch of it all the same.

There are things in that paper that nobody knows but me, or ever will.

Behind that outside pattern the dim shapes get clearer every day.

It is always the same shape, only very numerous.

And it is like a woman stooping down and creeping about behind that
pattern. I don’t like it a bit. I wonder—I begin to think—I wish John
would take me away from here!

It is so hard to talk with John about my case, because he is so wise,
and because he loves me so.

But I tried it last night.

It was moonlight. The moon shines in all around, just as the sun does.

I hate to see it sometimes, it creeps so slowly, and always comes in by
one window or another.

John was asleep and I hated to waken him, so I kept still and watched
the moonlight on that undulating wallpaper till I felt creepy.

The faint figure behind seemed to shake the pattern, just as if she
wanted to get out.

I got up softly and went to feel and see if the paper did move, and
when I came back John was awake.

“What is it, little girl?” he said. “Don’t go walking about like
that—you’ll get cold.”

I thought it was a good time to talk, so I told him that I really was
not gaining here, and that I wished he would take me away.

“Why darling!” said he, “our lease will be up in three weeks, and I
can’t see how to leave before.

“The repairs are not done at home, and I cannot possibly leave town
just now. Of course if you were in any danger I could and would, but
you really are better, dear, whether you can see it or not. I am a
doctor, dear, and I know. You are gaining flesh and color, your
appetite is better. I feel really much easier about you.”

“I don’t weigh a bit more,” said I, “nor as much; and my appetite may
be better in the evening, when you are here, but it is worse in the
morning when you are away.”

“Bless her little heart!” said he with a big hug; “she shall be as sick
as she pleases! But now let’s improve the shining hours by going to
sleep, and talk about it in the morning!”

“And you won’t go away?” I asked gloomily.

“Why, how can I, dear? It is only three weeks more and then we will
take a nice little trip of a few days while Jennie is getting the house
ready. Really, dear, you are better!”

“Better in body perhaps”—I began, and stopped short, for he sat up
straight and looked at me with such a stern, reproachful look that I
could not say another word.

“My darling,” said he, “I beg of you, for my sake and for our child’s
sake, as well as for your own, that you will never for one instant let
that idea enter your mind! There is nothing so dangerous, so
fascinating, to a temperament like yours. It is a false and foolish
fancy. Can you not trust me as a physician when I tell you so?”

So of course I said no more on that score, and we went to sleep before
long. He thought I was asleep first, but I wasn’t,—I lay there for
hours trying to decide whether that front pattern and the back pattern
really did move together or separately.

On a pattern like this, by daylight, there is a lack of sequence, a
defiance of law, that is a constant irritant to a normal mind.

The color is hideous enough, and unreliable enough, and infuriating
enough, but the pattern is torturing.

You think you have mastered it, but just as you get well under way in
following, it turns a back somersault and there you are. It slaps you
in the face, knocks you down, and tramples upon you. It is like a bad
dream.

The outside pattern is a florid arabesque, reminding one of a fungus.
If you can imagine a toadstool in joints, an interminable string of
toadstools, budding and sprouting in endless convolutions,—why, that is
something like it.

That is, sometimes!

There is one marked peculiarity about this paper, a thing nobody seems
to notice but myself, and that is that it changes as the light changes.

When the sun shoots in through the east window—I always watch for that
first long, straight ray—it changes so quickly that I never can quite
believe it.

That is why I watch it always.

By moonlight—the moon shines in all night when there is a moon—I
wouldn’t know it was the same paper.

At night in any kind of light, in twilight, candlelight, lamplight, and
worst of all by moonlight, it becomes bars! The outside pattern I mean,
and the woman behind it is as plain as can be.

I didn’t realize for a long time what the thing was that showed
behind,—that dim sub-pattern,—but now I am quite sure it is a woman.

By daylight she is subdued, quiet. I fancy it is the pattern that keeps
her so still. It is so puzzling. It keeps me quiet by the hour.

I lie down ever so much now. John says it is good for me, and to sleep
all I can.

Indeed, he started the habit by making me lie down for an hour after
each meal.

It is a very bad habit, I am convinced, for, you see, I don’t sleep.

And that cultivates deceit, for I don’t tell them I’m awake,—oh, no!

The fact is, I am getting a little afraid of John.

He seems very queer sometimes, and even Jennie has an inexplicable
look.

It strikes me occasionally, just as a scientific hypothesis, that
perhaps it is the paper!

I have watched John when he did not know I was looking, and come into
the room suddenly on the most innocent excuses, and I’ve caught him
several times looking at the paper! And Jennie too. I caught Jennie
with her hand on it once.

She didn’t know I was in the room, and when I asked her in a quiet, a
very quiet voice, with the most restrained manner possible, what she
was doing with the paper she turned around as if she had been caught
stealing, and looked quite angry—asked me why I should frighten her so!

Then she said that the paper stained everything it touched, that she
had found yellow smooches on all my clothes and John’s, and she wished
we would be more careful!

Did not that sound innocent? But I know she was studying that pattern,
and I am determined that nobody shall find it out but myself!

Life is very much more exciting now than it used to be. You see I have
something more to expect, to look forward to, to watch. I really do eat
better, and am more quiet than I was.

John is so pleased to see me improve! He laughed a little the other
day, and said I seemed to be flourishing in spite of my wallpaper.

I turned it off with a laugh. I had no intention of telling him it was
because of the wallpaper—he would make fun of me. He might even want to
take me away.

I don’t want to leave now until I have found it out. There is a week
more, and I think that will be enough.

I’m feeling ever so much better! I don’t sleep much at night, for it is
so interesting to watch developments; but I sleep a good deal in the
daytime.

In the daytime it is tiresome and perplexing.

There are always new shoots on the fungus, and new shades of yellow all
over it. I cannot keep count of them, though I have tried
conscientiously.

It is the strangest yellow, that wallpaper! It makes me think of all
the yellow things I ever saw—not beautiful ones like buttercups, but
old foul, bad yellow things.

But there is something else about that paper—the smell! I noticed it
the moment we came into the room, but with so much air and sun it was
not bad. Now we have had a week of fog and rain, and whether the
windows are open or not, the smell is here.

It creeps all over the house.

I find it hovering in the dining-room, skulking in the parlor, hiding
in the hall, lying in wait for me on the stairs.

It gets into my hair.

Even when I go to ride, if I turn my head suddenly and surprise
it—there is that smell!

Such a peculiar odor, too! I have spent hours in trying to analyze it,
to find what it smelled like.

It is not bad—at first, and very gentle, but quite the subtlest, most
enduring odor I ever met.

In this damp weather it is awful. I wake up in the night and find it
hanging over me.

It used to disturb me at first. I thought seriously of burning the
house—to reach the smell.

But now I am used to it. The only thing I can think of that it is like
is the color of the paper! A yellow smell.

There is a very funny mark on this wall, low down, near the mopboard. A
streak that runs round the room. It goes behind every piece of
furniture, except the bed, a long, straight, even smooch, as if it had
been rubbed over and over.

I wonder how it was done and who did it, and what they did it for.
Round and round and round—round and round and round—it makes me dizzy!

I really have discovered something at last.

Through watching so much at night, when it changes so, I have finally
found out.

The front pattern does move—and no wonder! The woman behind shakes it!

Sometimes I think there are a great many women behind, and sometimes
only one, and she crawls around fast, and her crawling shakes it all
over.

Then in the very bright spots she keeps still, and in the very shady
spots she just takes hold of the bars and shakes them hard.

And she is all the time trying to climb through. But nobody could climb
through that pattern—it strangles so; I think that is why it has so
many heads.

They get through, and then the pattern strangles them off and turns
them upside-down, and makes their eyes white!

If those heads were covered or taken off it would not be half so bad.

I think that woman gets out in the daytime!

And I’ll tell you why—privately—I’ve seen her!

I can see her out of every one of my windows!

It is the same woman, I know, for she is always creeping, and most
women do not creep by daylight.

I see her on that long shaded lane, creeping up and down. I see her in
those dark grape arbors, creeping all around the garden.

I see her on that long road under the trees, creeping along, and when a
carriage comes she hides under the blackberry vines.

I don’t blame her a bit. It must be very humiliating to be caught
creeping by daylight!

I always lock the door when I creep by daylight. I can’t do it at
night, for I know John would suspect something at once.

And John is so queer now, that I don’t want to irritate him. I wish he
would take another room! Besides, I don’t want anybody to get that
woman out at night but myself.

I often wonder if I could see her out of all the windows at once.

But, turn as fast as I can, I can only see out of one at one time.

And though I always see her she may be able to creep faster than I can
turn!

I have watched her sometimes away off in the open country, creeping as
fast as a cloud shadow in a high wind.

If only that top pattern could be gotten off from the under one! I mean
to try it, little by little.

I have found out another funny thing, but I shan’t tell it this time!
It does not do to trust people too much.

There are only two more days to get this paper off, and I believe John
is beginning to notice. I don’t like the look in his eyes.

And I heard him ask Jennie a lot of professional questions about me.
She had a very good report to give.

She said I slept a good deal in the daytime.

John knows I don’t sleep very well at night, for all I’m so quiet!

He asked me all sorts of questions, too, and pretended to be very
loving and kind.

As if I couldn’t see through him!

Still, I don’t wonder he acts so, sleeping under this paper for three
months.

It only interests me, but I feel sure John and Jennie are secretly
affected by it.

Hurrah! This is the last day, but it is enough. John is to stay in town
over night, and won’t be out until this evening.

Jennie wanted to sleep with me—the sly thing! but I told her I should
undoubtedly rest better for a night all alone.

That was clever, for really I wasn’t alone a bit! As soon as it was
moonlight, and that poor thing began to crawl and shake the pattern, I
got up and ran to help her.

I pulled and she shook, I shook and she pulled, and before morning we
had peeled off yards of that paper.

A strip about as high as my head and half around the room.

And then when the sun came and that awful pattern began to laugh at me
I declared I would finish it to-day!

We go away to-morrow, and they are moving all my furniture down again
to leave things as they were before.

Jennie looked at the wall in amazement, but I told her merrily that I
did it out of pure spite at the vicious thing.

She laughed and said she wouldn’t mind doing it herself, but I must not
get tired.

How she betrayed herself that time!

But I am here, and no person touches this paper but me—not alive!

She tried to get me out of the room—it was too patent! But I said it
was so quiet and empty and clean now that I believed I would lie down
again and sleep all I could; and not to wake me even for dinner—I would
call when I woke.

So now she is gone, and the servants are gone, and the things are gone,
and there is nothing left but that great bedstead nailed down, with the
canvas mattress we found on it.

We shall sleep downstairs to-night, and take the boat home to-morrow.

I quite enjoy the room, now it is bare again.

How those children did tear about here!

This bedstead is fairly gnawed!

But I must get to work.

I have locked the door and thrown the key down into the front path.

I don’t want to go out, and I don’t want to have anybody come in, till
John comes.

I want to astonish him.

I’ve got a rope up here that even Jennie did not find. If that woman
does get out, and tries to get away, I can tie her!

But I forgot I could not reach far without anything to stand on!

This bed will not move!

I tried to lift and push it until I was lame, and then I got so angry I
bit off a little piece at one corner—but it hurt my teeth.

Then I peeled off all the paper I could reach standing on the floor. It
sticks horribly and the pattern just enjoys it! All those strangled
heads and bulbous eyes and waddling fungus growths just shriek with
derision!

I am getting angry enough to do something desperate. To jump out of the
window would be admirable exercise, but the bars are too strong even to
try.

Besides I wouldn’t do it. Of course not. I know well enough that a step
like that is improper and might be misconstrued.

I don’t like to look out of the windows even—there are so many of those
creeping women, and they creep so fast.

I wonder if they all come out of that wallpaper as I did?

But I am securely fastened now by my well-hidden rope—you don’t get me
out in the road there!

I suppose I shall have to get back behind the pattern when it comes
night, and that is hard!

It is so pleasant to be out in this great room and creep around as I
please!

I don’t want to go outside. I won’t, even if Jennie asks me to.

For outside you have to creep on the ground, and everything is green
instead of yellow.

But here I can creep smoothly on the floor, and my shoulder just fits
in that long smooch around the wall, so I cannot lose my way.

Why, there’s John at the door!

It is no use, young man, you can’t open it!

How he does call and pound!

Now he’s crying for an axe.

It would be a shame to break down that beautiful door!

“John dear!” said I in the gentlest voice, “the key is down by the
front steps, under a plantain leaf!”

That silenced him for a few moments.

Then he said—very quietly indeed, “Open the door, my darling!”

“I can’t,” said I. “The key is down by the front door under a plantain
leaf!”

And then I said it again, several times, very gently and slowly, and
said it so often that he had to go and see, and he got it, of course,
and came in. He stopped short by the door.

“What is the matter?” he cried. “For God’s sake, what are you doing!”

I kept on creeping just the same, but I looked at him over my shoulder.

“I’ve got out at last,” said I, “in spite of you and Jane! And I’ve
pulled off most of the paper, so you can’t put me back!”

Now why should that man have fainted? But he did, and right across my
path by the wall, so that I had to creep over him every time!




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YELLOW WALLPAPER ***


Title: Heidi
       (Gift Edition)

Author: Johanna Spyri

Commentator: Charles Wharton Stork

Illustrator: Maria Kirk

Translator: Elisabeth Stork

Release Date: March 9, 2007 [EBook #20781]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEIDI ***




Produced by Jason Isbell, Emma Morgan Isbell, Jeannie Howse
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net. This file is gratefully uploaded to
the PG collection in honor of Distributed Proofreaders
having posted over 10,000 ebooks.






       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                       |
    |                                                           |
    | This document reproduces the text for the Gift Edition of |
    | Heidi, if you would like to see the illustrations, margin |
    | art, and decorations, the html version is recommended.    |
    |                                                           |
    | Inconsistent hyphenation in the original document has     |
    | been preserved.                                           |
    |                                                           |
    | Obvious typographical errors have been corrected in this  |
    | text. For a complete list, please see the end of this     |
    | document.                                                 |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *




                            HEIDI

                        JOHANNA SPYRI


                   [Illustration: (Heidi)]

                   [Illustration: (Peter)]




                            HEIDI

                         GIFT EDITION


   [Illustration: WAVING HER HAND AND LOOKING AFTER HER DEPARTING
   FRIEND TILL HE SEEMED NO BIGGER THAN A LITTLE DOT
   _Page 228_]




                            HEIDI

                              BY
                        JOHANNA SPYRI

                        TRANSLATED BY
                      ELISABETH P. STORK

                  _WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY_
              CHARLES WHARTON STORK, A.M., PH.D.

                _14 ILLUSTRATIONS IN COLOR BY_
                        MARIA L. KIRK

                         GIFT EDITION

                   PHILADELPHIA AND LONDON
                   J.B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY
                             1919




         COPYRIGHT, 1915. BY J.B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY

           ADDITIONAL ILLUSTRATIONS AND DECORATIONS
         COPYRIGHT, 1919, BY J.B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY


              PRINTED BY J.B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY
                AT THE WASHINGTON SQUARE PRESS
                     PHILADELPHIA, U.S.A.




INTRODUCTION


Unassuming in plot and style, "Heidi" may none the less lay claim to
rank as a world classic. In the first place, both background and
characters ring true. The air of the Alps is wafted to us in every
page; the house among the pines, the meadows, and the eagle poised
above the naked rocks form a picture that no one could willingly
forget. And the people, from the kindly towns-folk to the quaint and
touching peasant types, are as real as any representation of human
nature need be. Every goat even, has its personality. As for the
little heroine, she is a blessing not only to everyone in the story,
but to everyone who reads it. The narrative merits of the book are too
apparent to call for comment.

As to the author, Johanna Spyri, she has so entirely lost herself in
her creation that we may pass over her career rather rapidly. She was
born in Switzerland in 1829, came of a literary family, and devoted
all her talent to the writing of books for and about children.

Since "Heidi" has been so often translated into English it may well be
asked why there is any need for a new version. The answer lies partly
in the conventional character of the previous translations. Now, if
there is any quality in "Heidi" that gives it a particular charm, that
quality is freshness, absolute spontaneity. To be sure, the story is
so attractive that it could never be wholly spoiled; but has not the
reader the right to enjoy it in English at least very nearly as much
as he could in German? The two languages are so different in nature
that anything like a literal rendering of one into the other is sure
to result in awkwardness and indirectness. Such a book must be not
translated, but re-lived and re-created.

To perform such a feat the writer must, to begin with, be familiar
with the mountains, and able to appreciate with Wordsworth

    The silence that is in the starry sky,
    The sleep that is among the lonely hills.

The translator of the present version was born and reared in a region
closely similar to that of the story. Her home was originally in the
picturesque town of Salzburg, and her father, Franz von Pausinger, was
one of the greatest landscape painters of his country and generation.
Another equally important requisite is knowledge of children. It
happens that this translator has a daughter just the age of the
heroine, who moreover loves to dress in Tyrolese costume. To translate
"Heidi" was for her therefore a labor of love, which means that the
love contended with and overcame the labor.

The English style of the present version is, then, distinctive. It has
often been noticed that those who acquire a foreign language often
learn to speak it with unusual clearness and purity. For illustration
we need go no further than Joseph Conrad, a Pole, probably the
greatest master of narrative English writing to-day; or to our own
fellow-citizen Carl Schurz. In the present case, the writer has lived
seven years in America and has strengthened an excellent training with
a wide reading of the best English classics.

Many people say that they read without noticing the author's style.
This is seldom quite true; unconsciously every one is impressed in
some way or other by the style of every book, or by its lack of style.
Children are particularly sensitive in this respect and should,
therefore, as much as is practicable, read only the best. In the new
translation of "Heidi" here offered to the public I believe that most
readers will notice an especial flavor, that very quality of delight
in mountain scenes, in mountain people and in child life generally,
which is one of the chief merits of the German original. The phrasing
has also been carefully adapted to the purpose of reading aloud--a
thing that few translators think of. In conclusion, the author,
realising the difference between the two languages, has endeavored to
write the story afresh, as Johanna Spyri would have written it had
English been her native tongue. How successful the attempt has been
the reader will judge.

                                    CHARLES WHARTON STORK
                            Assistant Professor of English at the
                                   University of Pennsylvania


[Illustration]




CONTENTS


PART I

HEIDI'S YEARS OF LEARNING AND TRAVEL

CHAPTER                                                      PAGE
    I. GOING UP TO THE ALM-UNCLE                               17

   II. WITH THE GRANDFATHER                                    38

  III. ON THE PASTURE                                          50

   IV. IN THE GRANDMOTHER'S HUT                                67

    V. TWO VISITORS                                            83

   VI. A NEW CHAPTER WITH NEW THINGS                           95

  VII. MISS ROTTENMEIER HAS AN UNCOMFORTABLE DAY              104

 VIII. GREAT DISTURBANCES IN THE SESEMANN HOUSE               119

   IX. THE MASTER OF THE HOUSE HEARS OF STRANGE DOINGS        129

    X. A GRANDMAMA                                            136

   XI. HEIDI GAINS IN SOME RESPECTS AND LOSES IN OTHERS       146

  XII. THE SESEMANN HOUSE IS HAUNTED                          153

 XIII. UP THE ALP ON A SUMMER EVENING                         165

  XIV. ON SUNDAY WHEN THE CHURCH BELLS RING                   183


PART II

HEIDI MAKES USE OF HER EXPERIENCE

   XV. PREPARATIONS FOR A JOURNEY                             199

  XVI. A GUEST ON THE ALP                                     207

 XVII. RETALIATION                                            219

XVIII. WINTER IN THE VILLAGE                                  229

  XIX. WINTER STILL CONTINUES                                 243

   XX. NEWS FROM DISTANT FRIENDS                              252

  XXI. ON FURTHER EVENTS ON THE ALP                           268

 XXII. SOMETHING UNEXPECTED HAPPENS                           276

XXIII. PARTING TO MEET AGAIN                                  293




ILLUSTRATIONS

                                                             PAGE
WAVING HER HAND AND LOOKING AFTER HER DEPARTING
  FRIEND TILL HE LOOKED NO BIGGER THAN A LITTLE
  DOT                                              _Frontispiece_

SHE UNDID THE HEAVY SHAWL AND THE TWO LITTLE DRESSES           30

HERE A NEAT LITTLE BED WAS PREPARED                            41

SHE HANDED HIM ALSO THE WHOLE SLICE OF CHEESE                  57

OFF THEY STARTED AT SUCH A PACE THAT HEIDI SHOUTED FOR
  JOY                                                          71

WHEN HEIDI HEARD THAT SHE STRUGGLED TO GET FREE                92

OFF THEY STARTED, AND SOON HEIDI WAS PULLING THE
  DOOR-BELL                                                   116

THERE SHE WOULD REMAIN, EATING HER HEART AWAY WITH
  LONGING                                                     152

THROWING HERSELF IN HER GRANDFATHER'S ARMS, SHE HELD HIM
  TIGHT                                                       179

WITH HEIDI'S HAND IN HIS THEY WANDERED DOWN TOGETHER          192

THEY ARE COMING, OH, THE DOCTOR IS COMING FIRST               211

THE TWO CHILDREN WERE ALREADY FLYING DOWN THE ALP             241

HE WATCHED HIS FALLEN ENEMY TUMBLING DOWNWARDS,
  DOWNWARDS                                                   277

PETER SHOT OFF AND RUSHED DOWN THE MOUNTAIN-SIDE,
  TURNING WILD SOMERSAULTS ON HIS PERILOUS WAY                298




Part I

Heidi's Years of Learning and Travel

[Illustration]




HEIDI


I

GOING UP TO THE ALM-UNCLE


The little old town of Mayenfeld is charmingly situated. From it a
footpath leads through green, well-wooded stretches to the foot of the
heights which look down imposingly upon the valley. Where the footpath
begins to go steeply and abruptly up the Alps, the heath, with its
short grass and pungent herbage, at once sends out its soft perfume to
meet the wayfarer.

One bright sunny morning in June, a tall, vigorous maiden of the
mountain region climbed up the narrow path, leading a little girl by
the hand. The youngster's cheeks were in such a glow that it showed
even through her sun-browned skin. Small wonder though! for in spite
of the heat, the little one, who was scarcely five years old, was
bundled up as if she had to brave a bitter frost. Her shape was
difficult to distinguish, for she wore two dresses, if not three, and
around her shoulders a large red cotton shawl. With her feet encased
in heavy hob-nailed boots, this hot and shapeless little person toiled
up the mountain.

The pair had been climbing for about an hour when they reached a
hamlet half-way up the great mountain named the Alm. This hamlet was
called "Im Dörfli" or "The Little Village." It was the elder girl's
home town, and therefore she was greeted from nearly every house;
people called to her from windows and doors, and very often from the
road. But, answering questions and calls as she went by, the girl did
not loiter on her way and only stood still when she reached the end of
the hamlet. There a few cottages lay scattered about, from the
furthest of which a voice called out to her through an open door:
"Deta, please wait one moment! I am coming with you, if you are going
further up."

When the girl stood still to wait, the child instantly let go her hand
and promptly sat down on the ground.

"Are you tired, Heidi?" Deta asked the child.

"No, but hot," she replied.

"We shall be up in an hour, if you take big steps and climb with all
your little might!" Thus the elder girl tried to encourage her small
companion.

A stout, pleasant-looking woman stepped out of the house and joined
the two. The child had risen and wandered behind the old
acquaintances, who immediately started gossiping about their friends
in the neighborhood and the people of the hamlet generally.

"Where are you taking the child, Deta?" asked the newcomer. "Is she
the child your sister left?"

"Yes," Deta assured her; "I am taking her up to the Alm-Uncle and
there I want her to remain."

"You can't really mean to take her there Deta. You must have lost your
senses, to go to him. I am sure the old man will show you the door and
won't even listen to what you say."

"Why not? As he's her grandfather, it is high time he should do
something for the child. I have taken care of her until this summer
and now a good place has been offered to me. The child shall not
hinder me from accepting it, I tell you that!"

"It would not be so hard, if he were like other mortals. But you know
him yourself. How could he _look_ after a child, especially such a
little one? She'll never get along with him, I am sure of that!--But
tell me of your prospects."

"I am going to a splendid house in Frankfurt. Last summer some people
went off to the baths and I took care of their rooms. As they got to
like me, they wanted to take me along, but I could not leave. They
have come back now and have persuaded me to go with them."

"I am glad I am not the child!" exclaimed Barbara with a shudder.
"Nobody knows anything about the old man's life up there. He doesn't
speak to a living soul, and from one year's end to the other he keeps
away from church. People get out of his way when he appears once in a
twelve-month down here among us. We all fear him and he is really just
like a heathen or an old Indian, with those thick grey eyebrows and
that huge uncanny beard. When he wanders along the road with his
twisted stick we are all afraid to meet him alone."

"That is not my fault," said Deta stubbornly. "He won't do her any
harm; and if he should, he is responsible, not I."

"I wish I knew what weighs on the old man's conscience. Why are his
eyes so fierce and why does he live up there all alone? Nobody ever
sees him and we hear many strange things about him. Didn't your sister
tell you anything, Deta?"

"Of course she did, but I shall hold my tongue. He would make me pay
for it if I didn't."

Barbara had long been anxious to know something about the old uncle
and why he lived apart from everybody. Nobody had a good word for him,
and when people talked about him, they did not speak openly but as if
they were afraid. She could not even explain to herself why he was
called the Alm-Uncle. He could not possibly be the uncle of all the
people in the village, but since everybody spoke of him so, she did
the same. Barbara, who had only lived in the village since her
marriage, was glad to get some information from her friend. Deta had
been bred there, but since her mother's death had gone away to earn
her livelihood.

She confidentially seized Deta's arm and said: "I wish you would tell
me the truth about him, Deta; you know it all--people only gossip.
Tell me, what has happened to the old man to turn everybody against
him so? Did he always hate his fellow-creatures?"

"I cannot tell you whether he always did, and that for a very good
reason. He being sixty years old, and I only twenty-six, you can't
expect me to give you an account of his early youth. But if you'll
promise to keep it to yourself and not set all the people in Prätiggan
talking, I can tell you a good deal. My mother and he both came from
Domleschg."

"How can you talk like that, Deta?" replied Barbara in an offended
tone. "People do not gossip much in Prätiggan, and I always can keep
things to myself, if I have to. You won't repent of having told me, I
assure you!"

"All right, but keep your word!" said Deta warningly. Then she looked
around to see that the child was not so close to them as to overhear
what might be said; but the little girl was nowhere to be seen. While
the two young women had talked at such a rate, they had not noticed
her absence; quite a while must have elapsed since the little girl had
given up following her companions. Deta, standing still, looked about
her everywhere, but no one was on the path, which--except for a few
curves--was visible as far down as the village.

"There she is! Can't you see her there?" exclaimed Barbara, pointing
to a spot a good distance from the path. "She is climbing up with the
goatherd Peter and his goats. I wonder why he is so late to-day. I
must say, it suits us well enough; he can look after the child while
you tell me everything without being interrupted."

"It will be very easy for Peter to watch her," remarked Deta; "she is
bright for her five years and keeps her eyes wide open. I have often
noticed that and I am glad for her, for it will be useful with the
uncle. He has nothing left in the whole wide world, but his cottage
and two goats!"

"Did he once have more?" asked Barbara.

"I should say so. He was heir to a large farm in Domleschg. But
setting up to play the fine gentleman, he soon lost everything with
drink and play. His parents died with grief and he himself
disappeared from these parts. After many years he came back with a
half-grown boy, his son, Tobias, that was his name, became a carpenter
and turned out to be a quiet, steady fellow. Many strange rumors went
round about the uncle and I think that was why he left Domleschg for
Dörfli. We acknowledged relationship, my mother's grandmother being a
cousin of his. We called him uncle, and because we are related on my
father's side to nearly all the people in the hamlet they too all
called him uncle. He was named 'Alm-Uncle' when he moved up to the
Alm."

"But what happened to Tobias?" asked Barbara eagerly.

"Just wait. How can I tell you everything at once?" exclaimed Deta.
"Tobias was an apprentice in Mels, and when he was made master, he
came home to the village and married my sister Adelheid. They always
had been fond of each other and they lived very happily as man and
wife. But their joy was short. Two years afterwards, when Tobias was
helping to build a house, a beam fell on him and killed him. Adelheid
was thrown into a violent fever with grief and fright, and never
recovered from it. She had never been strong and had often suffered
from queer spells, when we did not know whether she was awake or
asleep. Only a few weeks after Tobias's death they buried poor
Adelheid.

"People said that heaven had punished the uncle for his misdeeds.
After the death of his son he never spoke to a living soul. Suddenly
he moved up to the Alp, to live there at enmity with God and man.

"My mother and I took Adelheid's little year-old baby, Heidi, to live
with us. When I went to Ragatz I took her with me; but in the spring
the family whose work I had done last year came from Frankfurt and
resolved to take me to their town-house. I am very glad to get such a
good position."

"And now you want to hand over the child to this terrible old man. I
really wonder how you can do it, Deta!" said Barbara with reproach in
her voice.

"It seems to me I have really done enough for the child. I do not know
where else to take her, as she is too young to come with me to
Frankfurt. By the way, Barbara, where are you going? We are half-way
up the Alm already."

Deta shook hands with her companion and stood still while Barbara
approached the tiny, dark-brown mountain hut, which lay in a hollow a
few steps away from the path.

Situated half-way up the Alm, the cottage was luckily protected from
the mighty winds. Had it been exposed to the tempests, it would have
been a doubtful habitation in the state of decay it was in. Even as it
was, the doors and windows rattled and the old rafters shook when the
south wind swept the mountain side. If the hut had stood on the Alm
top, the wind would have blown it down the valley without much ado
when the storm season came.

Here lived Peter the goatherd, a boy eleven years old, who daily
fetched the goats from the village and drove them up the mountain to
the short and luscious grasses of the pastures. Peter raced down in
the evening with the light-footed little goats. When he whistled
sharply through his fingers, every owner would come and get his or her
goat. These owners were mostly small boys and girls and, as the goats
were friendly, they did not fear them. That was the only time Peter
spent with other children, the rest of the day the animals were his
sole companions. At home lived his mother and an old blind
grandmother, but he only spent enough time in the hut to swallow his
bread and milk for breakfast and the same repast for supper. After
that he sought his bed to sleep. He always left early in the morning
and at night he came home late, so that he could be with his friends
as long as possible. His father had met with an accident some years
ago; he also had been called Peter the goatherd. His mother, whose
name was Brigida, was called "Goatherd Peter's wife" and his blind
grandmother was called by young and old from many miles about just
"grandmother."

Deta waited about ten minutes to see if the children were coming up
behind with the goats. As she could not find them anywhere, she
climbed up a little higher to get a better view down the valley from
there, and peered from side to side with marks of great impatience on
her countenance.

The children in the meantime were ascending slowly in a zigzag way,
Peter always knowing where to find all sorts of good grazing places
for his goats where they could nibble. Thus they strayed from side to
side. The poor little girl had followed the boy only with the greatest
effort and she was panting in her heavy clothes. She was so hot and
uncomfortable that she only climbed by exerting all her strength. She
did not say anything but looked enviously at Peter, who jumped about
so easily in his light trousers and bare feet. She envied even more
the goats that climbed over bushes, stones, and steep inclines with
their slender legs. Suddenly sitting down on the ground the child
swiftly took off her shoes and stockings. Getting up she undid the
heavy shawl and the two little dresses. Out she slipped without more
ado and stood up in only a light petticoat. In sheer delight at the
relief, she threw up her dimpled arms, that were bare up to her short
sleeves. To save the trouble of carrying them, her aunt had dressed
her in her Sunday clothes over her workday garments. Heidi arranged
her dresses neatly in a heap and joined Peter and the goats. She was
now as light-footed as any of them. When Peter, who had not paid much
attention, saw her suddenly in her light attire, he grinned. Looking
back, he saw the little heap of dresses on the ground and then he
grinned yet more, till his mouth seemed to reach from ear to ear; but
he said never a word.

The child, feeling free and comfortable, started to converse with
Peter, and he had to answer many questions. She asked him how many
goats he had, and where he led them, what he did with them when he got
there, and so forth.

   [Illustration: SHE UNDID THE HEAVY SHAWL AND THE TWO LITTLE
   DRESSES]

At last the children reached the summit in front of the hut. When Deta
saw the little party of climbers she cried out shrilly: "Heidi, what
have you done? What a sight you are! Where are your dresses and your
shawl? Are the new shoes gone that I just bought for you, and the new
stockings that I made myself? Where are they all, Heidi?"

The child quietly pointed down and said "There."

The aunt followed the direction of her finger and descried a little
heap with a small red dot in the middle, which she recognized as the
shawl.

"Unlucky child!" Deta said excitedly. "What does all this mean? Why
have you taken your things all off?"

"Because I do not need them," said the child, not seeming in the least
repentant of her deed.

"How can you be so stupid, Heidi? Have you lost your senses?" the aunt
went on, in a tone of mingled vexation and reproach. "Who do you think
will go way down there to fetch those things up again? It is
half-an-hour's walk. Please, Peter, run down and get them. Do not
stand and stare at me as if you were glued to the spot."

"I am late already," replied Peter, and stood without moving from the
place where, with his hands in his trousers' pockets, he had witnessed
the violent outbreak of Heidi's aunt.

"There you are, standing and staring, but that won't get you further,"
said Deta. "I'll give you this if you go down." With that she held a
five-penny-piece under his eyes. That made Peter start and in a great
hurry he ran down the straightest path. He arrived again in so short a
time that Deta had to praise him and gave him her little coin without
delay. He did not often get such a treasure, and therefore his face
was beaming and he laughingly dropped the money deep into his pocket.

"If you are going up to the uncle, as we are, you can carry the pack
till we get there," said Deta. They still had to climb a steep ascent
that lay behind Peter's hut. The boy readily took the things and
followed Deta, his left arm holding the bundle and his right swinging
the stick. Heidi jumped along gaily by his side with the goats.

After three quarters of an hour they reached the height where the hut
of the old man stood on a prominent rock, exposed to every wind, but
bathed in the full sunlight. From there you could gaze far down into
the valley. Behind the hut stood three old fir-trees with great shaggy
branches. Further back the old grey rocks rose high and sheer. Above
them you could see green and fertile pastures, till at last the stony
boulders reached the bare, steep cliffs.

Overlooking the valley the uncle had made himself a bench, by the side
of the hut. Here he sat, with his pipe between his teeth and both
hands resting on his knees. He quietly watched the children climbing
up with the goats and Aunt Deta behind them, for the children had
caught up to her long ago. Heidi reached the top first, and
approaching the old man she held out her hand to him and said: "Good
evening, grandfather!"

"Well, well, what does that mean?" replied the old man in a rough
voice. Giving her his hand for only a moment, he watched her with a
long and penetrating look from under his bushy brows. Heidi gazed back
at him with an unwinking glance and examined him with much curiosity,
for he was strange to look at, with his thick, grey beard and shaggy
eyebrows, that met in the middle like a thicket.

Heidi's aunt had arrived in the meantime with Peter, who was eager to
see what was going to happen.

"Good-day to you, uncle," said Deta as she approached. "This is
Tobias's and Adelheid's child. You won't be able to remember her,
because last time you saw her she was scarcely a year old."

"Why do you bring her here?" asked the uncle, and turning to Peter he
said: "Get away and bring my goats. How late you are already!"

Peter obeyed and disappeared on the spot; the uncle had looked at him
in such a manner that he was glad to go.

"Uncle, I have brought the little girl for you to keep," said Deta. "I
have done my share these last four years and now it is your turn to
provide for her."

The old man's eyes flamed with anger. "Indeed!" he said. "What on
earth shall I do, when she begins to whine and cry for you? Small
children always do, and then I'll be helpless."

"You'll have to look out for that!" Deta retorted. "When the little
baby was left in my hands a few years ago, I had to find out how to
care for the little innocent myself and nobody told me anything. I
already had mother on my hands and there was plenty for me to do. You
can't blame me if I want to earn some money now. If you can't keep the
child, you can do with her whatever you please. If she comes to harm
you are responsible and I am sure you do not want to burden your
conscience any further."

Deta had said more in her excitement than she had intended, just
because her conscience was not quite clear. The uncle had risen during
her last words and now he gave her such a look that she retreated a
few steps. Stretching out his arm in a commanding gesture, he said to
her: "Away with you! Begone! Stay wherever you came from and don't
venture soon again into my sight!"

Deta did not have to be told twice. She said "Good-bye" to Heidi and
"Farewell" to the uncle, and started down the mountain. Like steam her
excitement seemed to drive her forward, and she ran down at a
tremendous rate. The people in the village called to her now more than
they had on her way up, because they all were wondering where she had
left the child. They were well acquainted with both and knew their
history. When she heard from door and windows: "Where is the child?"
"Where have you left her, Deta?" and so forth, she answered more and
more reluctantly: "Up with the Alm-Uncle,--with the Alm-Uncle!" She
became much provoked because the women called to her from every side:
"How could you do it?" "The poor little creature!" "The idea of
leaving such a helpless child up there!" and, over and over again:
"The poor little dear!" Deta ran as quickly as she could and was glad
when she heard no more calls, because, to tell the truth, she herself
was uneasy. Her mother had asked her on her deathbed to care for
Heidi. But she consoled herself with the thought that she would be
able to do more for the child if she could earn some money. She was
very glad to go away from people who interfered in her affairs, and
looked forward with great delight to her new place.

[Illustration]




II

WITH THE GRANDFATHER


After Deta had disappeared, the Uncle sat down again on the bench,
blowing big clouds of smoke out of his pipe. He did not speak, but
kept his eyes fastened on the ground. In the meantime Heidi looked
about her, and discovering the goat-shed, peeped in. Nothing could be
seen inside. Searching for some more interesting thing, she saw the
three old fir-trees behind the hut. Here the wind was roaring through
the branches and the tree-tops were swaying to and fro. Heidi stood
still to listen. After the wind had ceased somewhat, she walked round
the hut back to her grandfather. She found him in exactly the same
position, and planting herself in front of the old man, with arms
folded behind her back, she gazed at him. The grandfather, looking up,
saw the child standing motionless before him. "What do you want to do
now?" he asked her.

"I want to see what's in the hut," replied Heidi.

"Come then," and with that the grandfather got up and entered the
cottage.

"Take your things along," he commanded.

"I do not want them any more," answered Heidi.

The old man, turning about, threw a penetrating glance at her. The
child's black eyes were sparkling in expectation of all the things to
come. "She is not lacking in intelligence," he muttered to himself.
Aloud he added: "Why don't you need them any more?"

"I want to go about like the light-footed goats!"

"All right, you can; but fetch the things and we'll put them in the
cupboard." The child obeyed the command. The old man now opened the
door, and Heidi followed him into a fairly spacious room, which took
in the entire expanse of the hut. In one corner stood a table and a
chair, and in another the grandfather's bed. Across the room a large
kettle was suspended over the hearth, and opposite to it a large door
was sunk into the wall. This the grandfather opened. It was the
cupboard, in which all his clothes were kept. In one shelf were a few
shirts, socks and towels; on another a few plates, cups and glasses;
and on the top shelf Heidi could see a round loaf of bread, some bacon
and cheese. In this cupboard the grandfather kept everything that he
needed for his subsistence. When he opened it, Heidi pushed her things
as far behind the grandfather's clothes as she could reach. She did
not want them found again in a hurry. After looking around attentively
in the room, she asked, "Where am I going to sleep, grandfather?"

"Wherever you want to," he replied. That suited Heidi exactly. She
peeped into all the corners of the room and looked at every little
nook to find a cosy place to sleep. Beside the old man's bed she saw a
ladder. Climbing up, she arrived at a hayloft, which was filled with
fresh and fragrant hay. Through a tiny round window she could look far
down into the valley.

   [Illustration: HERE A NEAT LITTLE BED WAS PREPARED]

"I want to sleep up here," Heidi called down. "Oh, it is lovely here.
Please come up, grandfather, and see it for yourself."

"I know it," sounded from below.

"I am making the bed now," the little girl called out again, while she
ran busily to and fro. "Oh, do come up and bring a sheet, grandfather,
for every bed must have a sheet."

"Is that so?" said the old man. After a while he opened the cupboard
and rummaged around in it. At last he pulled out a long coarse cloth
from under the shirts. It somewhat resembled a sheet, and with this he
climbed up to the loft. Here a neat little bed was already prepared.
On top the hay was heaped up high so that the head of the occupant
would lie exactly opposite the window.

The grandfather was well pleased with the arrangement. To prevent the
hard floor from being felt, he made the couch twice as thick. Then he
and Heidi together put the heavy sheet on, tucking the ends in well.
Heidi looked thoughtfully at her fresh, new bed and said,
"Grandfather, we have forgotten something."

"What?" he asked.

"I have no cover. When I go to bed I always creep in between the sheet
and the cover."

"What shall we do if I haven't any?" asked the grandfather.

"Never mind, I'll just take some more hay to cover me," Heidi
reassured him, and was just going to the heap of hay when the old man
stopped her.

"Just wait one minute," he said, and went down to his own bed. From it
he took a large, heavy linen bag and brought it to the child.

"Isn't this better than hay?" he asked.

Heidi pulled the sack to and fro with all her might, but she could not
unfold it, for it was too heavy for her little arms. The grandfather
put the thick cover on the bed while Heidi watched him. After it was
all done, she said: "What a nice bed I have now, and what a splendid
cover! I only wish the evening was here, that I might go to sleep in
it."

"I think we might eat something first," said the grandfather. "Don't
you think so?"

Heidi had forgotten everything else in her interest for the bed; but
when she was reminded of her dinner, she noticed how terribly hungry
she really was. She had had only a piece of bread and a cup of thin
coffee very early in the morning, before her long journey. Heidi said
approvingly: "I think we might, grandfather!"

"Let's go down then, if we agree," said the old man, and followed
close behind her. Going up to the fireplace, he pushed the big kettle
aside and reached for a smaller one that was suspended on a chain.
Then sitting down on a three-legged stool, he kindled a bright fire.
When the kettle was boiling, the old man put a large piece of cheese
on a long iron fork, and held it over the fire, turning it to and fro,
till it was golden-brown on all sides. Heidi had watched him eagerly.
Suddenly she ran to the cupboard. When her grandfather brought a pot
and the toasted cheese to the table, he found it already nicely set
with two plates and two knives and the bread in the middle. Heidi had
seen the things in the cupboard and knew that they would be needed for
the meal.

"I am glad to see that you can think for yourself," said the
grandfather, while he put the cheese on top of the bread, "but
something is missing yet."

Heidi saw the steaming pot and ran back to the cupboard in all haste.
A single little bowl was on the shelf. That did not perplex Heidi
though, for she saw two glasses standing behind. With those three
things she returned to the table.

"You certainly can help yourself! Where shall you sit, though?" asked
the grandfather, who occupied the only chair himself, Heidi flew to
the hearth, and bringing back the little stool, sat down on it.

"Now you have a seat, but it is much too low. In fact, you are too
little to reach the table from my chair. Now you shall have something
to eat at last!" and with that the grandfather filled the little bowl
with milk. Putting it on his chair, he pushed it as near to the stool
as was possible, and in that way Heidi had a table before her. He
commanded her to eat the large piece of bread and the slice of golden
cheese. He sat down himself on a corner of the table and started his
own dinner. Heidi drank without stopping, for she felt exceedingly
thirsty after her long journey. Taking a long breath, she put down her
little bowl.

"How do you like the milk?" the grandfather asked her.

"I never tasted better," answered Heidi.

"Then you shall have more," and with that the grandfather filled the
little bowl again. The little girl ate and drank with the greatest
enjoyment. After she was through, both went out into the goat-shed.
Here the old man busied himself, and Heidi watched him attentively
while he was sweeping and putting down fresh straw for the goats to
sleep on. Then he went to the little shop alongside and fashioned a
high chair for Heidi, to the little girl's greatest amazement.

"What is this?" asked the grandfather.

"This is a chair for me. I am sure of it because it is so high. How
quickly it was made!" said the child, full of admiration and wonder.

"She knows what is what and has her eyes on the right place," the
grandfather said to himself, while he walked around the hut, fastening
a nail or a loose board here and there. He wandered about with his
hammer and nails, repairing whatever was in need of fixing. Heidi
followed him at every step and watched the performance with great
enjoyment and attention.

At last the evening came. The old fir-trees were rustling and a mighty
wind was roaring and howling through the tree-tops. Those sounds
thrilled Heidi's heart and filled it with happiness and joy. She
danced and jumped about under the trees, for those sounds made her
feel as if a wonderful thing had happened to her. The grandfather
stood under the door, watching her, when suddenly a shrill whistle was
heard. Heidi stood still and the grandfather joined her outside. Down
from the heights came one goat after another, with Peter in their
midst. Uttering a cry of joy, Heidi ran into the middle of the flock,
greeting her old friends. When they had all reached the hut, they
stopped on their way and two beautiful slender goats came out of the
herd, one of them white and the other brown. They came up to the
grandfather, who held out some salt in his hands to them, as he did
every night. Heidi tenderly caressed first one and then the other,
seeming beside herself with joy.

"Are they ours, grandfather? Do they both belong to us? Are they going
to the stable? Are they going to stay with us?" Heidi kept on asking
in her excitement. The grandfather hardly could put in a "yes, yes,
surely" between her numerous questions. When the goats had licked up
all the salt, the old man said, "Go in, Heidi, and fetch your bowl
and the bread."

Heidi obeyed and returned instantly. The grandfather milked a full
bowl from the white goat, cut a piece of bread for the child, and told
her to eat. "Afterwards you can go to bed. If you need some shirts and
other linen, you will find them in the bottom of the cupboard. Aunt
Deta has left a bundle for you. Now good-night, I have to look after
the goats and lock them up for the night."

"Good-night, grandfather! Oh, please tell me what their names are,"
called Heidi after him.

"The white one's name is Schwänli and the brown one I call Bärli," was
his answer.

"Good-night, Schwänli! Good-night, Bärli," the little girl called
loudly, for they were just disappearing in the shed. Heidi now sat
down on the bench and took her supper. The strong wind nearly blew her
from her seat, so she hurried with her meal, to be able to go inside
and up to her bed. She slept in it as well as a prince on his royal
couch.

Very soon after Heidi had gone up, before it was quite dark, the old
man also sought his bed. He was always up in the morning with the sun,
which rose early over the mountain-side in those summer days. It was a
wild, stormy night; the hut was shaking in the gusts and all the
boards were creaking. The wind howled through the chimney and the old
fir-trees shook so strongly that many a dry branch came crashing down.
In the middle of the night the grandfather got up, saying to himself:
"I am sure she is afraid." Climbing up the ladder, he went up to
Heidi's bed. The first moment everything lay in darkness, when all of
a sudden the moon came out behind the clouds and sent his brilliant
light across Heidi's bed. Her cheeks were burning red and she lay
peacefully on her round and chubby arms. She must have had a happy
dream, for she was smiling in her sleep. The grandfather stood and
watched her till a cloud flew over the moon and left everything in
total darkness. Then he went down to seek his bed again.




III

ON THE PASTURE


Heidi was awakened early next morning by a loud whistle. Opening her
eyes, she saw her little bed and the hay beside her bathed in golden
sunlight. For a short while she did not know where she was, but when
she heard her grandfather's deep voice outside, she recollected
everything. She remembered how she had come up the mountain the day
before and left old Ursula, who was always shivering with cold and sat
near the stove all day. While Heidi lived with Ursula, she had always
been obliged to keep in the house, where the old woman could see her.
Being deaf, Ursula was afraid to let Heidi go outdoors, and the child
had often fretted in the narrow room and had longed to run outside.
She was therefore delighted to find herself in her new home and hardly
could wait to see the goats again. Jumping out of bed, she put on her
few things and in a short time went down the ladder and ran outside.
Peter was already there with his flock, waiting for Schwänli and
Bärli, whom the grandfather was just bringing to join the other goats.

"Do you want to go with him to the pasture?" asked the grandfather.

"Yes," cried Heidi, clapping her hands.

"Go now, and wash yourself first, for the sun will laugh at you if he
sees how dirty you are. Everything is ready there for you," he added,
pointing to a large tub of water that stood in the sun. Heidi did as
she was told, and washed and rubbed herself till her cheeks were
glowing. In the meanwhile the grandfather called to Peter to come into
the hut and bring his bag along. The boy followed the old man, who
commanded him to open the bag in which he carried his scanty dinner.
The grandfather put into the bag a piece of bread and a slice of
cheese, that were easily twice as large as those the boy had in the
bag himself.

"The little bowl goes in, too," said the Uncle, "for the child does
not know how to drink straight from the goat, the way you do. She is
going to stay with you all day, therefore milk two bowls full for her
dinner. Look out that she does not fall over the rocks! Do you hear?"

Just then Heidi came running in. "Grandfather, can the sun still laugh
at me?" she asked. The child had rubbed herself so violently with the
coarse towel which the grandfather had put beside the tub that her
face, neck and arms were as red as a lobster. With a smile the
grandfather said: "No, he can't laugh any more now; but when you come
home to-night you must go into the tub like a fish. When one goes
about like the goats, one gets dirty feet. Be off!"

They started merrily up the Alp. A cloudless, deep-blue sky looked
down on them, for the wind had driven away every little cloud in the
night. The fresh green mountain-side was bathed in brilliant sunlight,
and many blue and yellow flowers had opened. Heidi was wild with joy
and ran from side to side. In one place she saw big patches of fine
red primroses, on another spot blue gentians sparkled in the grass,
and everywhere the golden rock-roses were nodding to her. In her
transport at finding such treasures, Heidi even forgot Peter and his
goats. She ran far ahead of him and then strayed away off to one side,
for the sparkling flowers tempted her here and there. Picking whole
bunches of them to take home with her, she put them all into her
little apron.

Peter, whose round eyes could only move about slowly, had a hard time
looking out for her. The goats were even worse, and only by shouting
and whistling, especially by swinging his rod, could he drive them
together.

"Heidi, where are you now?" he called quite angrily.

"Here," it sounded from somewhere. Peter could not see her, for she
was sitting on the ground behind a little mound, which was covered
with fragrant flowers. The whole air was filled with their perfume,
and the child drew it in, in long breaths.

"Follow me now!" Peter called out. "The grandfather has told me to
look out for you, and you must not fall over the rocks."

"Where are they?" asked Heidi without even stirring.

"Way up there, and we have still far to go. If you come quickly, we
may see the eagle there and hear him shriek."

That tempted Heidi, and she came running to Peter, with her apron full
of flowers.

"You have enough now," he declared. "If you pick them all to-day,
there won't be any left to-morrow." Heidi admitted that, besides which
she had her apron already full. From now on she stayed at Peter's
side. The goats, scenting the pungent herbs, also hurried up without
delay.

Peter generally took his quarters for the day at the foot of a high
cliff, which seemed to reach far up into the sky. Overhanging rocks on
one side made it dangerous, so that the grandfather was wise to warn
Peter.

After they had reached their destination, the boy took off his bag,
putting it in a little hollow in the ground. The wind often blew in
violent gusts up there, and Peter did not want to lose his precious
load. Then he lay down in the sunny grass, for he was very tired.

Heidi, taking off her apron, rolled it tightly together and put it
beside Peter's bag. Then, sitting down beside the boy, she looked
about her. Far down she saw the glistening valley; a large field of
snow rose high in front of her. Heidi sat a long time without
stirring, with Peter asleep by her side and the goats climbing about
between the bushes. A light breeze fanned her cheek and those big
mountains about her made her feel happy as never before. She looked up
at the mountain-tops till they all seemed to have faces, and soon they
were familiar to her, like old friends. Suddenly she heard a loud,
sharp scream, and looking up she beheld the largest bird she had ever
seen, flying above her. With outspread wings he flew in large circles
over Heidi's head.

"Wake up, Peter!" Heidi called. "Look up, Peter, and see the eagle
there!"

Peter got wide wake, and then they both watched the bird breathlessly.
It rose higher and higher into the azure, till it disappeared at last
behind the mountain-peak.

"Where has it gone?" Heidi asked.

"Home to its nest," was Peter's answer.

"Oh, does it really live way up there? How wonderful that must be! But
tell me why it screams so loud?" Heidi inquired.

"Because it has to," Peter replied.

"Oh, let's climb up there and see its nest!" implored Heidi, but
Peter, expressing decided disapproval in his voice, answered: "Oh
dear, Oh dear, not even goats could climb up there! Grandfather has
told me not to let you fall down the rocks, so we can't go!"

Peter now began to call loudly and to whistle, and soon all the goats
were assembled on the green field. Heidi ran into their midst, for she
loved to see them leaping and playing about.

Peter in the meantime was preparing dinner for Heidi and himself, by
putting her large pieces on one side and his own small ones on the
other. Then he milked Bärli and put the full bowl in the middle. When
he was ready, he called to the little girl. But it took some time
before she obeyed his call.

   [Illustration: SHE HANDED HIM ALSO THE WHOLE SLICE OF CHEESE]

"Stop jumping, now," said Peter, "and sit down; your dinner is ready."

"Is this milk for me?" she inquired.

"Yes it is; those large pieces also belong to you. When you are
through with the milk, I'll get you some more. After that I'll get
mine."

"What milk do you get?" Heidi inquired.

"I get it from my own goat, that speckled one over there. But go ahead
and eat!" Peter commanded again. Heidi obeyed, and when the bowl was
empty, he filled it again. Breaking off a piece of bread for herself,
she gave Peter the rest, which was still bigger than his own portion
had been. She handed him also the whole slice of cheese, saying: "You
can eat that, I have had enough!"

Peter was speechless with surprise, for it would have been impossible
for him ever to give up any of his share. Not taking Heidi in earnest,
he hesitated till she put the things on his knees. Then he saw she
really meant it, and he seized his prize. Nodding his thanks to her,
he ate the most luxurious meal he had ever had in all his life. Heidi
was watching the goats in the meantime, and asked Peter for their
names.

The boy could tell them all to her, for their names were about the
only thing he had to carry in his head. She soon knew them, too, for
she had listened attentively. One of them was the Big Turk, who tried
to stick his big horns into all the others. Most of the goats ran away
from their rough comrade. The bold Thistlefinch alone was not afraid,
and running his horns three or four times into the other, so
astonished the Turk with his great daring that he stood still and gave
up fighting, for the Thistlefinch had sharp horns and met him in the
most warlike attitude. A small, white goat, called Snowhopper, kept up
bleating in the most piteous way, which induced Heidi to console it
several times. Heidi at last went to the little thing again, and
throwing her arms around its head, she asked, "What is the matter with
you, Snowhopper? Why do you always cry for help?" The little goat
pressed close to Heidi's side and became perfectly quiet. Peter was
still eating, but between the swallows he called to Heidi: "She is so
unhappy, because the old goat has left us. She was sold to somebody in
Mayenfeld two days ago."

"Who was the old goat?"

"Her mother, of course."

"Where is her grandmother?"

"She hasn't any."

"And her grandfather?"

"Hasn't any either."

"Poor little Snowhopper!" said Heidi, drawing the little creature
tenderly to her. "Don't grieve any more; see, I am coming up with you
every day now, and if there is anything the matter, you can come to
me."

Snowhopper rubbed her head against Heidi's shoulder and stopped
bleating. When Peter had finally finished his dinner, he joined Heidi.

The little girl had just been observing that Schwänli and Bärli were
by far the cleanest and prettiest of the goats. They evaded the
obtrusive Turk with a sort of contempt and always managed to find the
greenest bushes for themselves. She mentioned it to Peter, who
replied: "I know! Of course they are the prettiest, because the uncle
washes them and gives them salt. He has the best stable by far."

All of a sudden Peter, who had been lying on the ground, jumped up and
bounded after the goats. Heidi, knowing that something must have
happened, followed him. She saw him running to a dangerous abyss on
the side. Peter had noticed how the rash Thistlefinch had gone nearer
and nearer to the dangerous spot. Peter only just came in time to
prevent the goat from falling down over the very edge. Unfortunately
Peter had stumbled over a stone in his hurry and was only able to
catch the goat by one leg. The Thistlefinch, being enraged to find
himself stopped in his charming ramble, bleated furiously. Not being
able to get up, Peter loudly called for help. Heidi immediately saw
that Peter was nearly pulling off the animal's leg. She quickly picked
some fragrant herbs and holding them under the animal's nose, she said
soothingly: "Come, come, Thistlefinch, and be sensible. You might fall
down there and break your leg. That would hurt you horribly."

The goat turned about and devoured the herbs Heidi held in her hand.
When Peter got to his feet, he led back the runaway with Heidi's help.
When he had the goat in safety, he raised his rod to beat it for
punishment. The goat retreated shyly, for it knew what was coming.
Heidi screamed loudly: "Peter, no, do not beat him! look how scared he
is."

"He well deserves it," snarled Peter, ready to strike. But Heidi,
seizing his arm, shouted, full of indignation: "You mustn't hurt him!
Let him go!"

Heidi's eyes were sparkling, and when he saw her with her commanding
mien, he desisted and dropped his rope. "I'll let him go, if you give
me a piece of your cheese again to-morrow," he said, for he wanted a
compensation for his fright.

"You may have it all to-morrow and every day, because I don't need
it," Heidi assured him. "I shall also give you a big piece of bread,
if you promise never to beat any of the goats."

"I don't care," growled Peter, and in that way he gave his promise.

Thus the day had passed, and the sun was already sinking down behind
the mountains. Sitting on the grass, Heidi looked at the bluebells and
the wild roses that were shining in the last rays of the sun. The
peaks also started to glow, and Heidi suddenly called to the boy: "Oh,
Peter, look! everything is on fire. The mountains are burning and the
sky, too. Oh, look! the moon over there is on fire, too. Do you see
the mountains all in a glow? Oh, how beautiful the snow looks! Peter,
the eagle's nest is surely on fire, too. Oh, look at the fir-trees
over there!"

Peter was quietly peeling his rod, and looking up, said to Heidi:
"This is no fire; it always looks like that."

"But what is it then?" asked Heidi eagerly, gazing about her
everywhere.

"It gets that way of itself," explained Peter.

"Oh look! Everything is all rosy now! Oh, look at this mountain over
there with the snow and the sharp peaks. What is its name?"

"Mountains have no names," he answered.

"Oh, see, how beautiful! It looks as if many, many roses were growing
on those cliffs. Oh, now they are getting grey. Oh dear! the fire has
gone out and it is all over. What a terrible shame!" said Heidi quite
despondently.

"It will be the same again tomorrow," Peter reassured her. "Come now,
we have to go home."

When Peter had called the goats together, they started downwards.

"Will it be like that every day when we are up?" asked Heidi, eagerly.

"It usually is," was the reply.

"What about tomorrow?" she inquired.

"Tomorrow it will be like that, I am sure," Peter affirmed.

That made Heidi feel happy again. She walked quietly by Peter's side,
thinking over all the new things she had seen. At last, reaching the
hut, they found the grandfather waiting for them on a bench under the
fir-trees. Heidi ran up to him and the two goats followed, for they
knew their master. Peter called to her: "Come again tomorrow!
Good-night!"

Heidi gave him her hand, assuring him that she would come, and finding
herself surrounded by the goats, she hugged Snowhopper a last time.

When Peter had disappeared, Heidi returned to her grandfather. "Oh
grandfather! it was so beautiful! I saw the fire and the roses on the
rocks! And see the many, many flowers I am bringing you!" With that
Heidi shook them out of her apron. But oh, how miserable they looked!
Heidi did not even know them any more.

"What is the matter with them, grandfather? They looked so different!"
Heidi exclaimed in her fright.

"They are made to bloom in the sun and not to be shut up in an apron,"
said the grandfather.

"Then I shall never pick them any more! Please, grandfather, tell me
why the eagle screeches so loudly," asked Heidi.

"First go and take a bath, while I go into the shed to get your milk.
Afterwards we'll go inside together and I'll tell you all about it
during supper-time."

They did as was proposed, and when Heidi sat on her high chair before
her milk, she asked the same question as before.

"Because he is sneering at the people down below, who sit in the
villages and make each other angry. He calls down to them:--'If you
would go apart to live up on the heights like me, you would feel much
better!'" The grandfather said these last words with such a wild
voice, that it reminded Heidi of the eagle's screech.

"Why do the mountains have no names, grandfather?" asked Heidi.

"They all have names, and if you tell me their shape I can name them
for you."

Heidi described several and the old man could name them all. The child
told him now about all the happenings of the day, and especially about
the wonderful fire. She asked how it came about.

"The sun does it," he exclaimed. "Saying good-night to the mountains,
he throws his most beautiful rays to them, that they may not forget
him till the morning."

Heidi was so much pleased with this explanation, that she could hardly
wait to see the sun's good-night greetings repeated. It was time now
to go to bed, and Heidi slept soundly all night. She dreamt that the
little Snowhopper was bounding happily about on the glowing mountains
with many glistening roses blooming round her.




IV

IN THE GRANDMOTHER'S HUT


Next morning Peter came again with his goats, and Heidi went up to the
pasture with them. This happened day after day, and in this healthy
life Heidi grew stronger, and more sunburnt every day. Soon the autumn
came and when the wind was blowing across the mountainside, the
grandfather would say: "You must stay home to-day, Heidi; for the wind
can blow such a little thing as you down into the valley with a single
gust."

It always made Peter unhappy when Heidi did not come along, for he saw
nothing but misfortunes ahead of him; he hardly knew how to pass his
time, and besides, he was deprived of his abundant dinner. The goats
were so accustomed to Heidi by this time, that they did not follow
Peter when she was not with him.

Heidi herself did not mind staying at home, for she loved nothing
better than to watch her grandfather with his saw and hammer.
Sometimes the grandfather would make small round cheeses on those
days, and there was no greater pleasure for Heidi than to see him stir
the butter with his bare arms. When the wind would howl through the
fir-trees on those stormy days, Heidi would run out to the grove,
thrilled and happy by the wondrous roaring in the branches. The sun
had lost its vigor, and the child had to put on her shoes and
stockings and her little dress.

The weather got colder and colder, and when Peter came up in the
morning, he would blow into his hands, he was so frozen. At last even
Peter could not come any more, for a deep snow had fallen over night.
Heidi stood at the window, watching the snow falling down. It kept on
snowing till it reached the windows; still it did not stop, and soon
the windows could not be opened, and they were all shut in. When it
had lasted for several days, Heidi thought that it would soon cover
up the cottage. It finally stopped, and the grandfather went out to
shovel the snow away from the door and windows, piling it up high here
and there. In the afternoon the two were sitting near the fire when
noisy steps were heard outside and the door was pushed open. It was
Peter, who had come up to see Heidi. Muttering, "Good-evening," he
went up to the fire. His face was beaming, and Heidi had to laugh when
she saw little waterfalls trickling down from his person, for all the
ice and snow had melted in the great heat.

The grandfather now asked Peter how he got along in school. Heidi was
so interested that she asked him a hundred questions. Poor Peter, who
was not an easy talker, found himself in great difficulty answering
the little girl's inquiries, but at least it gave him leisure to dry
his clothes.

During this conversation the grandfather's eyes had been twinkling,
and at last he said to the boy: "Now that you have been under fire,
general, you need some strengthening. Come and join us at supper."

With that the old man prepared a meal which amply satisfied Peter's
appetite. It had begun to get dark, and Peter knew that it was time to
go. He had said good-bye and thank you, when turning to Heidi he
remarked:

"I'll come next Sunday, if I may. By the way, Heidi, grandmother asked
me to tell you that she would love to see you."

Heidi immediately approved of this idea, and her first word next
morning was: "Grandfather, I must go down to grandmother. She is
expecting me."

Four days later the sun was shining and the tight-packed frozen snow
was crackling under every step. Heidi was sitting at the dinner-table,
imploring the old man to let her make the visit then, when he got up,
and fetching down her heavy cover, told her to follow him. They went
out into the glistening snow; no sound was heard and the snow-laden
fir-trees shone and glittered in the sun. Heidi in her transport was
running to and fro: "Grandfather, come out! Oh, look at the trees!
They are all covered with silver and gold," she called to the
grandfather, who had just come out of his workshop with a wide sled.
Wrapping the child up in her cover, he put her on the sled, holding
her fast. Off they started at such a pace that Heidi shouted for joy,
for she seemed to be flying like a bird. The sled had stopped in front
of Peter's hut, and grandfather said: "Go in. When it gets dark, start
on your way home." When he had unwrapped her, he turned homewards with
his sled.

[Illustration: OFF THEY STARTED AT SUCH A PACE THAT HEIDI SHOUTED FOR
JOY]

Opening the door, Heidi found herself in a tiny, dark kitchen, and
going through another door, she entered a narrow chamber. Near a table
a woman was seated, busy with mending Peter's coat, which Heidi had
recognized immediately. A bent old woman was sitting in a corner, and
Heidi, approaching her at once, said: "How do you do, grandmother? I
have come now, and I hope I haven't kept you waiting too long!"

Lifting her head, the grandmother sought for Heidi's hand. Feeling it
thoughtfully, she said: "Are you the little girl who lives up with the
uncle? Is your name Heidi?"

"Yes," Heidi replied. "The grandfather just brought me down in the
sled."

"How is it possible? Your hands are as warm as toast! Brigida, did the
uncle really come down with the child?"

Brigida, Peter's mother, had gotten up to look at the child. She said:
"I don't know if he did, but I don't think so. She probably doesn't
know."

Heidi, looking up, said quite decidedly: "I know that grandfather
wrapped me up in a cover when we coasted down together."

"Peter was right after all," said the grandmother. "We never thought
the child would live more than three weeks with him. Brigida, tell me
what she looks like."

"She has Adelheid's fine limbs and black eyes, and curly hair like
Tobias and the old man. I think she looks like both of them."

While the women were talking, Heidi had been taking in everything.
Then she said: "Grandmother, look at the shutter over there. It is
hanging loose. If grandfather were here, he would fasten it. It will
break the window-pane! Just look at it."

"What a sweet child you are," said the grandmother tenderly. "I can
hear it, but I cannot see it, child. This cottage rattles and creaks,
and when the wind blows, it comes in through every chink. Some day the
whole house will break to pieces and fall on top of us. If only Peter
knew how to mend it! We have no one else."

"Why, grandmother, can't you see the shutter?" asked Heidi.

"Child, I cannot see anything," lamented the old woman.

"Can you see it when I open the shutter to let in the light?"

"No, no, not even then. Nobody can ever show me the light again."

"But you can see when you go out into the snow, where everything is
bright. Come with me, grandmother, I'll show you!" and Heidi, taking
the old woman by the hand, tried to lead her out. Heidi was frightened
and got more anxious all the time.

"Just let me stay here, child. Everything is dark for me, and my poor
eyes can neither see the snow nor the light."

"But grandmother, does it not get light in the summer, when the sun
shines down on the mountains to say good-night, setting them all
aflame?"

"No, child, I can never see the fiery mountains any more. I have to
live in darkness, always."

Heidi burst out crying now and sobbed aloud. "Can nobody make it light
for you? Is there nobody who can do it, grandmother? Nobody?"

The grandmother tried all possible means to comfort the child; it
wrung her heart to see her terrible distress. It was awfully hard for
Heidi to stop crying when she had once begun, for she cried so seldom.
The grandmother said: "Heidi, let me tell you something. People who
cannot see love to listen to friendly words. Sit down beside me and
tell me all about yourself. Talk to me about your grandfather, for it
has been long since I have heard anything about him. I used to know
him very well."

Heidi suddenly wiped away her tears, for she had had a cheering
thought. "Grandmother, I shall tell grandfather about it, and I am
sure he can make it light for you. He can mend your little house and
stop the rattling."

The old woman remained silent, and Heidi, with the greatest vivacity,
began to describe her life with the grandfather. Listening
attentively, the two women would say to each other sometimes: "Do you
hear what she says about the uncle? Did you listen?"

Heidi's tale was interrupted suddenly by a great thumping on the door;
and who should come in but Peter. No sooner had he seen Heidi, than he
smiled, opening his round eyes as wide as possible. Heidi called,
"Good-evening, Peter!"

"Is it really time for him to come home!" exclaimed Peter's
grandmother. "How quickly the time has flown. Good-evening, little
Peter; how is your reading going?"

"Just the same," the boy replied.

"Oh, dear, I was hoping for a change at last. You are nearly twelve
years old, my boy."

"Why should there be a change?" inquired Heidi with greatest interest.

"I am afraid he'll never learn it after all. On the shelf over there
is an old prayer-book with beautiful songs. I have forgotten them all,
for I do not hear them any more. I longed that Peter should read them
to me some day, but he will never be able to!"

Peter's mother got up from her work now, saying, "I must make a light.
The afternoon has passed and now it's getting dark."

When Heidi heard those words, she started, and holding out her hand to
all, she said: "Good-night. I have to go, for it is getting dark." But
the anxious grandmother called out: "Wait, child, don't go up alone!
Go with her, Peter, and take care that she does not fall. Don't let
her get cold, do you hear? Has Heidi a shawl?"

"I haven't, but I won't be cold," Heidi called back, for she had
already escaped through the door. She ran so fast that Peter could
hardly follow her. The old woman frettingly called out: "Brigida, run
after her. Get a warm shawl, she'll freeze in this cold night. Hurry
up!" Brigida obeyed. The children had hardly climbed any distance,
when they saw the old man coming and with a few vigorous steps he
stood beside them.

"I am glad you kept your word, Heidi," he said; and packing her into
her cover, he started up the hill, carrying the child in his arms.
Brigida had come in time to see it, and told the grandmother what she
had witnessed.

"Thank God, thank God!" the old woman said. "I hope she'll come again;
she has done me so much good! What a soft heart she has, the darling,
and how nicely she can talk." All evening the grandmother said to
herself, "If only he lets her come again! I have something to look
forward to in this world now, thank God!"

Heidi could hardly wait before they reached the cottage. She had tried
to talk on the way, but no sound could be heard through the heavy
cover. As soon as they were inside the hut she began: "Grandfather, we
must take some nails and a hammer down tomorrow; a shutter is loose in
grandmother's house and many other places shake. Everything rattles in
her house."

"Is that so? Who says we must?"

"Nobody told me, but I know," Heidi replied. "Everything is loose in
the house, and poor grandmother told me she was afraid that the house
might tumble down. And grandfather, she cannot see the light. Can you
help her and make it light for her? How terrible it must be to be
afraid in the dark and nobody there to help you! Oh, please,
grandfather, do something to help her! I know you can."

Heidi had been clinging to her grandfather and looking up to him with
trusting eyes. At last he said, glancing down: "All right, child,
we'll see that it won't rattle any more. We can do it tomorrow."

Heidi was so overjoyed at these words that she danced around the room
shouting: "We'll do it tomorrow! We can do it tomorrow!"

The grandfather, keeping his word, took Heidi down the following day
with the same instructions as before. After Heidi had disappeared, he
went around the house inspecting it.

The grandmother, in her joy at seeing the child again, had stopped the
wheel and called: "Here is the child again! She has come again!"
Heidi, grasping her outstretched hands, sat herself on a low stool at
the old woman's feet and began to chat. Suddenly violent blows were
heard outside; the grandmother in her fright nearly upset the
spinning-wheel and screamed: "Oh, God, it has come at last. The hut is
tumbling down!"

"Grandmother, don't be frightened," said the child, while she put her
arms around her. "Grandfather is just fastening the shutter and fixing
everything for you."

"Is it possible? Has God not forgotten us after all? Brigida, have you
heard it? Surely that is a hammer. Ask him to come in a moment, if it
is he, for I must thank him."

When Brigida went out, she found the old man busy with putting a new
beam along the wall. Approaching him, she said: "Mother and I wish you
a good-afternoon. We are very much obliged to you for doing us such a
service, and mother would like to see you. There are few that would
have done it, uncle, and how can we thank you?"

"That will do," he interrupted. "I know what your opinion about me is.
Go in, for I can find what needs mending myself."

Brigida obeyed, for the uncle had a way that nobody could oppose. All
afternoon the uncle hammered around; he even climbed up on the roof,
where much was missing. At last he had to stop, for the last nail was
gone from his pocket. The darkness had come in the meantime, and
Heidi was ready to go up with him, packed warmly in his arms.

Thus the winter passed. Sunshine had come again into the blind woman's
life, and made her days less dark and dreary. Early every morning she
would begin to listen for Heidi's footsteps, and when the door was
opened and the child ran in, the grandmother exclaimed every time more
joyfully: "Thank God, she has come again!"

Heidi would talk about her life, and make the grandmother smile and
laugh, and in that way the hours flew by. In former times the old
woman had always sighed: "Brigida, is the day not over yet?" but now
she always exclaimed after Heidi's departure: "How quickly the
afternoon has gone by. Don't you think so, too, Brigida?" Her daughter
had to assent, for Heidi had long ago won her heart. "If only God will
spare us the child!" the grandmother would often say. "I hope the
uncle will always be kind, as he is now."--"Does Heidi look well,
Brigida?" was a frequent question, which always got a reassuring
answer.

Heidi also became very fond of the old grandmother, and when the
weather was fair, she visited her every day that winter. Whenever the
child remembered that the grandmother was blind, she would get very
sad; her only comfort was that her coming brought such happiness. The
grandfather soon had mended the cottage; often he would take down big
loads of timber, which he used to good purpose. The grandmother vowed
that no rattling could be heard any more, and that, thanks to the
uncle's kindness, she slept better that winter than she had done for
many a year.

[Illustration]




V

TWO VISITORS


Two winters had nearly passed. Heidi was happy, for the spring was
coming again, with the soft delicious wind that made the fir-trees
roar. Soon she would be able to go up to the pasture, where blue and
yellow flowers greeted her at every step. She was nearly eight years
old, and had learned to take care of the goats, who ran after her like
little dogs. Several times the village teacher had sent word by Peter
that the child was wanted in school, but the old man had not paid any
attention to the message and had kept her with him as before. It was a
beautiful morning in March. The snow had melted on the slopes, and was
going fast. Snowdrops were peeping through the ground, which seemed to
be getting ready for spring. Heidi was running to and fro before the
door, when she suddenly saw an old gentleman, dressed in black,
standing beside her. As she appeared frightened, he said kindly: "You
must not be afraid of me, for I love children. Give me your hand,
Heidi, and tell me where your grandfather is."

"He is inside, making round wooden spoons," the child replied, opening
the door while she spoke.

It was the old pastor of the village, who had known the grandfather
years ago. After entering, he approached the old man, saying:
"Good-morning, neighbor."

The old man got up, surprised, and offering a seat to the visitor,
said: "Good-morning, Mr. Parson. Here is a wooden chair, if it is good
enough."

Sitting down, the parson said: "It is long since I have seen you,
neighbor. I have come to-day to talk over a matter with you. I am sure
you can guess what it is about."

The clergyman here looked at Heidi, who was standing near the door.

"Heidi, run out to see the goats," said the grandfather, "and bring
them some salt; you can stay till I come."

Heidi disappeared on the spot. "The child should have come to school a
year ago," the parson went on to say. "Didn't you get the teacher's
warning? What do you intend to do with the child?"

"I do not want her to go to school," said the old man, unrelentingly.

"What do you want the child to be?"

"I want her to be free and happy as a bird!"

"But she is human, and it is high time for her to learn something. I
have come now to tell you about it, so that you can make your plans.
She must come to school next winter; remember that."

"I shan't do it, pastor!" was the reply.

"Do you think there is no way?" the clergyman replied, a little hotly.
"You know the world, for you have travelled far. What little sense you
show!"

"You think I am going to send this delicate child to school in every
storm and weather!" the old man said excitedly. "It is a two hours'
walk, and I shall not let her go; for the wind often howls so that it
chokes me if I venture out. Did you know Adelheid, her mother? She was
a sleep-walker, and had fainting-fits. Nobody shall compel me to let
her go; I will gladly fight it out in court."

"You are perfectly right," said the clergyman kindly. "You could not
send her to school from here. Why don't you come down to live among us
again? You are leading a strange life here; I wonder how you can keep
the child warm in winter."

"She has young blood and a good cover. I know where to find good wood,
and all winter I keep a fire going. I couldn't live in the village,
for the people there and I despise each other; we had better keep
apart."

"You are mistaken, I assure you! Make your peace with God, and then
you'll see how happy you will be."

The clergyman had risen, and holding out his hand, he said cordially:
"I shall count on you next winter, neighbor. We shall receive you
gladly, reconciled with God and man."

But the uncle replied firmly, while he shook his visitor by the hand:
"Thank you for your kindness, but you will have to wait in vain."

"God be with you," said the parson, and left him sadly.

The old man was out of humor that day, and when Heidi begged to go to
the grandmother, he only growled: "Not to-day." Next day they had
hardly finished their dinner, when another visitor arrived. It was
Heidi's aunt Deta; she wore a hat with feathers and a dress with such
a train that it swept up everything that lay on the cottage floor.
While the uncle looked at her silently, Deta began to praise him and
the child's red cheeks. She told him that it had not been her
intention to leave Heidi with him long, for she knew she must be in
his way. She had tried to provide for the child elsewhere, and at
last she had found a splendid chance for her. Very rich relations of
her lady, who owned the largest house in Frankfurt, had a lame
daughter. This poor little girl was confined to her rolling-chair and
needed a companion at her lessons. Deta had heard from her lady that a
sweet, quaint child was wanted as playmate and schoolmate for the
invalid. She had gone to the housekeeper and told her all about Heidi.
The lady, delighted with the idea, had told her to fetch the child at
once. She had come now, and it was a lucky chance for Heidi, "for one
never knew what might happen in such a case, and who could tell--"

"Have you finished?" the old man interrupted her at last.

"Why, one might think I was telling you the silliest things. There is
not a man in Prätiggan who would not thank God for such news."

"Bring them to somebody else, but not to me," said the uncle, coldly.

Deta, flaming up, replied: "Do you want to hear what I think? Don't I
know how old she is; eight years old and ignorant of everything. They
have told me that you refuse to send her to church and to school. She
is my only sister's child, and I shall not bear it, for I am
responsible. You do not care for her, how else could you be
indifferent to such luck. You had better give way or I shall get the
people to back me. If I were you, I would not have it brought to
court; some things might be warmed up that you would not care to hear
about."

"Be quiet!" the uncle thundered with flaming eyes. "Take her and ruin
her, but do not bring her before my sight again. I do not want to see
her with feathers in her hat and wicked words like yours."

With long strides he went out.

"You have made him angry!" said Heidi with a furious look.

"He won't be cross long. But come now, where are your things?" asked
Deta.

"I won't come," Heidi replied.

"What?" Deta said passionately. But changing her tone, she continued
in a more friendly manner: "Come now; you don't understand me. I am
taking you to the most beautiful place you have ever seen." After
packing up Heidi's clothes she said again, "Come, child, and take your
hat. It is not very nice, but we can't help it."

"I shall not come," was the reply.

"Don't be stupid and obstinate, like a goat. Listen to me. Grandfather
is sending us away and we must do what he commands, or he will get
more angry still. You'll see how fine it is in Frankfurt. If you do
not like it, you can come home again and by that time grandfather will
have forgiven us."

"Can I come home again to-night?" asked Heidi.

"Come now, I told you you could come back. If we get to Mayenfeld
today, we can take the train to-morrow. That will make you fly home
again in the shortest time!"

Holding the bundle, Deta led the child down the mountain. On their
way they met Peter, who had not gone to school that day. The boy
thought it was a more useful occupation to look for hazel-rods than to
learn to read, for he always needed the rods. He had had a most
successful day, for he carried an enormous bundle on his shoulder.
When he caught sight of Heidi and Deta, he asked them where they were
going.

"I am going to Frankfurt with Aunt Deta," Heidi replied; "but first I
must see grandmother, for she is waiting."

"Oh no, it is too late. You can see her when you come back, but not
now," said Deta, pulling Heidi along with her, for she was afraid that
the old woman might detain the child.

Peter ran into the cottage and hit the table with his rods. The
grandmother jumped up in her fright and asked him what that meant.

"They have taken Heidi away," Peter said with a groan.

"Who has, Peter? Where has she gone?" the unhappy grandmother asked.
Brigida had seen Deta walking up the footpath a short while ago and
soon they guessed what had happened. With a trembling hand the old
woman opened a window and called out as loudly as she could: "Deta,
Deta, don't take the child away. Don't take her from us."

When Heidi heard that she struggled to get free, and said: "I must go
to grandmother; she is calling me."

But Deta would not let her go. She urged her on by saying that she
might return soon again. She also suggested that Heidi might bring a
lovely present to the grandmother when she came back.

Heidi liked this prospect and followed Deta without more ado. After a
while she asked: "What shall I bring to the grandmother?"

"You might bring her some soft white rolls, Heidi. I think the black
bread is too hard for poor grandmother to eat."

"Yes, I know, aunt, she always gives it to Peter," Heidi confirmed
her. "We must go quickly now; we might get to Frankfurt today and
then I can be back tomorrow with the rolls."

   [Illustration: WHEN HEIDI HEARD THAT SHE STRUGGLED TO GET FREE]

Heidi was running now, and Deta had to follow. She was glad enough to
escape the questions that people might ask her in the village. People
could see that Heidi was pulling her along, so she said: "I can't
stop. Don't you see how the child is hurrying? We have still far to
go," whenever she heard from all sides: "Are you taking her with you?"
"Is she running away from the uncle?" "What a wonder she is still
alive!" "What red cheeks she has," and so on. Soon they had escaped
and had left the village far behind them.

From that time on the uncle looked more angry than ever when he came
to the village. Everybody was afraid of him, and the women would warn
their children to keep out of his sight.

He came down but seldom, and then only to sell his cheese and buy his
provisions. Often people remarked how lucky it was that Heidi had left
him. They had seen her hurrying away, so they thought that she had
been glad to go.

The old grandmother alone stuck to him faithfully. Whenever anybody
came up to her, she would tell them what good care the old man had
taken of Heidi. She also told them that he had mended her little
house. These reports reached the village, of course, but people only
half believed them, for the grandmother was infirm and old. She began
her days with sighing again. "All happiness has left us with the
child. The days are so long and dreary, and I have no joy left. If
only I could hear Heidi's voice before I die," the poor old woman
would exclaim, day after day.

[Illustration]




VI

A NEW CHAPTER WITH NEW THINGS


In a beautiful house in Frankfurt lived a sick child by the name of
Clara Sesemann. She was sitting in a comfortable rolling-chair, which
could be pushed from room to room. Clara spent most of her time in the
study, where long rows of bookcases lined the walls. This room was
used as a living-room, and here she was also given her lessons.

Clara had a pale, thin face with soft blue eyes, which at that moment
were watching the clock impatiently. At last she said: "Oh Miss
Rottenmeier, isn't it time yet?"

The lady so addressed was the housekeeper, who had lived with Clara
since Mrs. Sesemann's death. Miss Rottenmeier wore a peculiar uniform
with a long cape, and a high cap on her head. Clara's father, who was
away from home a great deal, left the entire management of the house
to this lady, on the condition that his daughter's wishes should
always be considered.

While Clara was waiting, Deta had arrived at the front door with
Heidi. She was asking the coachman who had brought her if she could go
upstairs.

"That's not my business," grumbled the coachman; "you must ring for
the butler."

Sebastian, the butler, a man with large brass buttons on his coat,
soon stood before her.

"May I see Miss Rottenmeier?" Deta asked.

"That's not my business," the butler announced. "Ring for Tinette, the
maid." With that, he disappeared.

Deta, ringing again, saw a girl with a brilliant white cap on her
head, coming down the stairway. The maid stopped half-way down and
asked scornfully: "What do you want?"

Deta repeated her wish again. Tinette told her to wait while she went
upstairs, but it did not take long before the two were asked to come
up.

Following the maid, they found themselves in the study. Deta held on
to Heidi's hand and stayed near the door.

Miss Rottenmeier, slowly getting up, approached the newcomers. She did
not seem pleased with Heidi, who wore her hat and shawl and was
looking up at the lady's headdress with innocent wonder.

"What is your name?" the lady asked.

"Heidi," was the child's clear answer.

"What? Is that a Christian name? What name did you receive in
baptism?" inquired the lady again.

"I don't remember that any more," the child replied.

"What an answer! What does that mean?" said the housekeeper, shaking
her head. "Is the child ignorant or pert, Miss Deta?"

"I shall speak for the child, if I may, madam," Deta said, after
giving Heidi a little blow for her unbecoming answer. "The child has
never been in such a fine house and does not know how to behave. I
hope the lady will forgive her manners. She is called Adelheid after
her mother, who was my sister."

"Oh well, that is better. But Miss Deta, the child seems peculiar for
her age. I thought I told you that Miss Clara's companion would have
to be twelve years old like her, to be able to share her studies. How
old is Adelheid?"

"I am sorry, but I am afraid she is somewhat younger than I thought. I
think she is about ten years old."

"Grandfather said that I was eight years old," said Heidi now. Deta
gave her another blow, but as the child had no idea why, she did not
get embarrassed.

"What, only eight years old!" Miss Rottenmeier exclaimed indignantly.
"How can we get along? What have you learned? What books have you
studied?"

"None," said Heidi.

"But how did you learn to read?"

"I can't read and Peter can't do it either," Heidi retorted.

"For mercy's sake! you cannot read?" cried the lady in her surprise.
"How is it possible? What else have you studied?"

"Nothing," replied Heidi, truthfully.

"Miss Deta, how could you bring this child?" said the housekeeper,
when she was more composed.

Deta, however, was not easily intimidated, and said: "I am sorry, but
I thought this child would suit you. She _is_ small, but older
children are often spoilt and not like her. I must go now, for my
mistress is waiting. As soon as I can, I'll come to see how the child
is getting along." With a bow she was outside and with a few quick
steps hurried down-stairs.

Miss Rottenmeier followed her and tried to call her back, for she
wanted to ask Deta a number of questions.

Heidi was still standing on the same spot. Clara had watched the
scene, and called to the child now to come to her.

Heidi approached the rolling-chair.

"Do you want to be called Heidi or Adelheid?" asked Clara.

"My name is Heidi and nothing else," was the child's answer.

"I'll call you Heidi then, for I like it very much," said Clara. "I
have never heard the name before. What curly hair you have! Was it
always like that?"

"I think so."

"Did you like to come to Frankfurt?" asked Clara again.

"Oh, no, but then I am going home again to-morrow, and shall bring
grandmother some soft white rolls," Heidi explained.

"What a curious child you are," said Clara. "You have come to
Frankfurt to stay with me, don't you know that? We shall have our
lessons together, and I think it will be great fun when you learn to
read. Generally the morning seems to have no end, for Mr. Candidate
comes at ten and stays till two. That is a long time, and he has to
yawn himself, he gets so tired. Miss Rottenmeier and he both yawn
together behind their books, but when I do it, Miss Rottenmeier makes
me take cod-liver oil and says that I am ill. So I must swallow my
yawns, for I hate the oil. What fun it will be now, when you learn to
read!"

Heidi shook her head doubtfully at these prospects.

"Everybody must learn to read, Heidi. Mr. Candidate is very patient
and will explain it all to you. You won't know what he means at first,
for it is difficult to understand him. It won't take long to learn,
though, and then you will know what he means."

When Miss Rottenmeier found that she was unable to recall Deta, she
came back to the children. She was in a very excited mood, for she
felt responsible for Heidi's coming and did not know how to cancel
this unfortunate step. She soon got up again to go to the dining-room,
criticising the butler and giving orders to the maid. Sebastian, not
daring to show his rage otherwise, noisily opened the folding doors.
When he went up to Clara's chair, he saw Heidi watching him intently.
At last she said: "You look like Peter."

Miss Rottenmeier was horrified with this remark, and sent them all
into the dining-room. After Clara was lifted on to her chair, the
housekeeper sat down beside her. Heidi was motioned to sit opposite
the lady. In that way they were placed at the enormous table. When
Heidi saw a roll on her plate, she turned to Sebastian, and pointing
at it, asked, "Can I have this?" Heidi had already great confidence in
the butler, especially on account of the resemblance she had
discovered. The butler nodded, and when he saw Heidi put the bread in
her pocket, could hardly keep from laughing. He came to Heidi now with
a dish of small baked fishes. For a long time the child did not move;
then turning her eyes to the butler, she said: "Must I eat that?"
Sebastian nodded, but another pause ensued. "Why don't you give it to
me?" the child quietly asked, looking at her plate. The butler, hardly
able to keep his countenance, was told to place the dish on the table
and leave the room.

When he was gone, Miss Rottenmeier explained to Heidi with many signs
how to help herself at table. She also told her never to speak to
Sebastian unless it was important. After that the child was told how
to accost the servants and the governess. When the question came up of
how to call Clara, the older girl said, "Of course you shall call me
Clara."

A great many rules followed now about behavior at all times, about the
shutting of doors and about going to bed, and a hundred other things.
Poor Heidi's eyes were closing, for she had risen at five that
morning, and leaning against her chair she fell asleep. When Miss
Rottenmeier had finished instructions, she said: "I hope you will
remember everything, Adelheid. Did you understand me?"

"Heidi went to sleep a long time ago," said Clara, highly amused.

"It is atrocious what I have to bear with this child," exclaimed Miss
Rottenmeier, ringing the bell with all her might. When the two
servants arrived, they were hardly able to rouse Heidi enough to show
her to her bed-room.




VII

MISS ROTTENMEIER HAS AN UNCOMFORTABLE DAY


When Heidi opened her eyes next morning, she did not know where she
was. She found herself on a high white bed in a spacious room. Looking
around she observed long white curtains before the windows, several
chairs, and a sofa covered with cretonne; in a corner she saw a
wash-stand with many curious things standing on it.

Suddenly Heidi remembered all the happenings of the previous day.
Jumping out of bed, she dressed in a great hurry. She was eager to
look at the sky and the ground below, as she had always done at home.
What was her disappointment when she found that the windows were too
high for her to see anything except the walls and windows opposite.
Trying to open them, she turned from one to the other, but in vain.
The poor child felt like a little bird that is placed in a glittering
cage for the first time. At last she had to resign herself, and sat
down on a low stool, thinking of the melting snow on the slopes and
the first flowers of spring that she had hailed with such delight.

Suddenly Tinette opened the door and said curtly: "Breakfast's ready."

Heidi did not take this for a summons, for the maid's face was
scornful and forbidding. She was waiting patiently for what would
happen next, when Miss Rottenmeier burst into the room, saying: "What
is the matter, Adelheid? Didn't you understand? Come to breakfast!"

Heidi immediately followed the lady into the dining-room, where Clara
greeted her with a smile. She looked much happier than usual, for she
expected new things to happen that day. When breakfast had passed
without disturbance, the two children were allowed to go into the
library together and were soon left alone.

"How can I see down to the ground?" Heidi asked.

"Open a window and peep out," replied Clara, amused at the question.

"But it is impossible to open them," Heidi said, sadly.

"Oh no. You can't do it and I can't help you, either, but if you ask
Sebastian he'll do it for you."

Heidi was relieved. The poor child had felt like a prisoner in her
room. Clara now asked Heidi what her home had been like, and Heidi
told her gladly about her life in the hut.

The tutor had arrived in the meantime, but he was not asked to go to
the study as usual. Miss Rottenmeier was very much excited about
Heidi's coming and all the complications that arose therefrom. She was
really responsible for it, having arranged everything herself. She
presented the unfortunate case before the teacher, for she wanted him
to help her to get rid of the child. Mr. Candidate, however, was
always careful of his judgments, and not afraid of teaching beginners.

When the lady saw that he would not side with her, she let him enter
the study alone, for the A,B,C held great horrors for her. While she
considered many problems, a frightful noise as of something falling
was heard in the adjoining room, followed by a cry to Sebastian for
help. Running in, she beheld a pile of books and papers on the floor,
with the table-cover on top. A black stream of ink flowed across the
length of the room. Heidi had disappeared.

"There," Miss Rottenmeier exclaimed, wringing her hands. "Everything
drenched with ink. Did such a thing ever happen before? This child
brings nothing but misfortunes on us."

The teacher was standing up, looking at the devastation, but Clara was
highly entertained by these events, and said: "Heidi has not done it
on purpose and must not be punished. In her hurry to get away she
caught on the table-cover and pulled it down. I think she must never
have seen a coach in all her life, for when she heard a carriage
rumbling by, she rushed out like mad."

"Didn't I tell you, Mr. Candidate, that she has no idea whatever about
behavior? She does not even know that she has to sit quiet at her
lessons. But where has she gone? What would Mr. Sesemann say if she
should run away?"

When Miss Rottenmeier went down-stairs to look for the child, she saw
her standing at the open door, looking down the street.

"What are you doing here? How can you run away like that?" scolded
Miss Rottenmeier.

"I heard the fir-trees rustle, but I can't see them and do not hear
them any more," replied Heidi, looking in great perplexity down the
street. The noise of the passing carriage had reminded her of the
roaring of the south-wind on the Alp.

"Fir-trees? What nonsense! We are not in a wood. Come with me now to
see what you have done." When Heidi saw the devastation that she had
caused, she was greatly surprised, for she had not noticed it in her
hurry.

"This must never happen again," said the lady sternly. "You must sit
quiet at your lessons; if you get up again I shall tie you to your
chair. Do you hear me?"

Heidi understood, and gave a promise to sit quietly during her lessons
from that time on. After the servants had straightened the room, it
was late, and there was no more time for studies. Nobody had time to
yawn that morning.

In the afternoon, while Clara was resting, Heidi was left to herself.
She planted herself in the hall and waited for the butler to come
up-stairs with the silver things. When he reached the head of the
stairs, she said to him: "I want to ask you something." She saw that
the butler seemed angry, so she reassured him by saying that she did
not mean any harm.

"All right, Miss, what is it?"

"My name is not Miss, why don't you call me Heidi?"

"Miss Rottenmeier told me to call you Miss."

"Did she? Well then, it must be so. I have three names already,"
sighed the child.

"What can I do for you?" asked Sebastian now.

"Can you open a window for me?"

"Certainly," he replied.

Sebastian got a stool for Heidi, for the window-sill was too high for
her to see over. In great disappointment, Heidi turned her head away.

"I don't see anything but a street of stone. Is it the same way on the
other side of the house?"

"Yes."

"Where do you go to look far down on everything?"

"On a church-tower. Do you see that one over there with the golden
dome? From there you can overlook everything."

Heidi immediately stepped down from the stool and ran down-stairs.
Opening the door, she found herself in the street, but she could not
see the tower any more. She wandered on from street to street, not
daring to accost any of the busy people. Passing a corner, she saw a
boy who had a barrel-organ on his back and a curious animal on his
arm. Heidi ran to him and asked: "Where is the tower with the golden
dome?"

"Don't know," was the reply.

"Who can tell me?"

"Don't know."

"Can you show me another church with a tower?"

"Of course I can."

"Then come and show me."

"What are you going to give me for it?" said the boy, holding out his
hand. Heidi had nothing in her pocket but a little flower-picture.
Clara had only given it to her this morning, so she was loath to part
with it. The temptation to look far down into the valley was too
great for her, though, and she offered him the gift. The boy shook his
head, to Heidi's satisfaction.

"What else do you want?"

"Money."

"I have none, but Clara has some. How much must I give you?"

"Twenty pennies."

"All right, but come."

While they were wandering down the street, Heidi found out what a
barrel-organ was, for she had never seen one. When they arrived before
an old church with a tower, Heidi was puzzled what to do next, but
having discovered a bell, she pulled it with all her might. The boy
agreed to wait for Heidi and show her the way home if she gave him a
double fee.

The lock creaked now from inside, and an old man opened the door. In
an angry voice, he said: "How do you dare to ring for me? Can't you
see that it is only for those who want to see the tower?"

"But I do," said Heidi.

"What do you want to see? Did anybody send you?" asked the man.

"No; but I want to look down from up there."

"Get home and don't try it again." With that the tower-keeper was
going to shut the door, but Heidi held his coat-tails and pleaded with
him to let her come. The tower-keeper looked at the child's eyes,
which were nearly full of tears.

"All right, come along, if you care so much," he said, taking her by
the hand. The two climbed up now many, many steps, which got narrower
all the time. When they had arrived on top, the old man lifted Heidi
up to the open window.

Heidi saw nothing but a sea of chimneys, roofs and towers, and her
heart sank. "Oh, dear, it's different from the way I thought it would
be," she said.

"There! what could such a little girl know about a view? We'll go down
now and you must promise never to ring at my tower any more."

On their way they passed an attic, where a large grey cat guarded her
new family in a basket. This cat caught half-a-dozen mice every day
for herself, for the old tower was full of rats and mice. Heidi gazed
at her in surprise, and was delighted when the old man opened the
basket.

"What charming kittens, what cunning little creatures!" she exclaimed
in her delight, when she saw them crawling about, jumping and
tumbling.

"Would you like to have one?" the old man asked.

"For me? to keep?" Heidi asked, for she could not believe her ears.

"Yes, of course. You can have several if you have room for them," the
old man said, glad to find a good home for the kittens.

How happy Heidi was! Of course there was enough room in the huge
house, and Clara would be delighted when she saw the cunning things.

"How can I take them with me?" the child asked, after she had tried in
vain to catch one.

"I can bring them to your house, if you tell me where you live," said
Heidi's new friend, while he caressed the old cat, who had lived with
him many years.

"Bring them to Mr. Sesemann's house; there is a golden dog on the
door, with a ring in his mouth."

The old man had lived in the tower a long time and knew everybody;
Sebastian also was a special friend of his.

"I know," he said. "But to whom shall I send them? Do you belong to
Mr. Sesemann?"

"No. Please send them to Clara; she will like them, I am sure."

Heidi could hardly tear herself away from the pretty things, so the
old man put one kitten in each of her pockets to console her. After
that she went away.

The boy was waiting patiently for her, and when she had taken leave of
the tower-keeper, she asked the boy: "Do you know where Mr. Sesemann's
house is?"

"No," was the reply.

She described it as well as she could, till the boy remembered it. Off
they started, and soon Heidi found herself pulling the door-bell. When
Sebastian arrived he said: "Hurry up." Heidi went in, and the boy was
left outside, for Sebastian had not even seen him.

"Come up quickly, little Miss," he urged. "They are all waiting for
you in the dining-room. Miss Rottenmeier looks like a loaded cannon.
How could you run away like that?"

Heidi sat down quietly on her chair. Nobody said a word, and there was
an uncomfortable silence. At last Miss Rottenmeier began with a severe
and solemn voice: "I shall speak with you later, Adelheid. How can you
leave the house without a word? Your behavior was very remiss. The
idea of walking about till so late!"

"Meow!" was the reply.

"I didn't," Heidi began--"Meow!"

Sebastian nearly flung the dish on the table, and disappeared.

"This is enough," Miss Rottenmeier tried to say, but her voice was
hoarse with fury. "Get up and leave the room."

[Illustration: OFF THEY STARTED, AND SOON HEIDI WAS PULLING THE
DOOR-BELL]

Heidi got up. She began again. "I made--" "Meow! meow! meow!--"

"Heidi," said Clara now, "why do you always say 'meow' again, if you
see that Miss Rottenmeier is angry?"

"I am not doing it, it's the kittens," she explained.

"What? Cats? Kittens?" screamed the housekeeper. "Sebastian, Tinette,
take the horrible things away!" With that she ran into the study,
locking herself in, for she feared kittens beyond anything on earth.
When Sebastian had finished his laugh, he came into the room. He had
foreseen the excitement, having caught sight of the kittens when Heidi
came in. The scene was a very peaceful one now; Clara held the little
kittens in her lap, and Heidi was kneeling beside her. They both
played happily with the two graceful creatures. The butler promised to
look after the new-comers and prepared a bed for them in a basket.

A long time afterwards, when it was time to go to bed, Miss
Rottenmeier cautiously opened the door. "Are they away?" she asked.
"Yes," replied the butler, quickly seizing the kittens and taking them
away.

The lecture that Miss Rottenmeier was going to give Heidi was
postponed to the following day, for the lady was too much exhausted
after her fright. They all went quietly to bed, and the children were
happy in the thought that their kittens had a comfortable bed.

[Illustration]




VIII

GREAT DISTURBANCES IN THE SESEMANN HOUSE


A short time after the tutor had arrived next morning, the door-bell
rang so violently that Sebastian thought it must be Mr. Sesemann
himself. What was his surprise when a dirty street-boy, with a
barrel-organ on his back, stood before him!

"What do you mean by pulling the bell like that?" the butler said.

"I want to see Clara."

"Can't you at least say 'Miss Clara', you ragged urchin?" said
Sebastian harshly.

"She owes me forty pennies," said the boy.

"You are crazy! How do you know Miss Clara lives here?"

"I showed her the way yesterday and she promised to give me forty
pennies."

"What nonsense! Miss Clara never goes out. You had better take
yourself off, before I send you!"

The boy, however, did not even budge, and said: "I saw her. She has
curly hair, black eyes and talks in a funny way."

"Oh," Sebastian chuckled to himself, "that was the little Miss."

Pulling the boy into the house, he said: "All right, you can follow
me. Wait at the door till I call you, and then you can play something
for Miss Clara."

Knocking at the study-door, Sebastian said, when he had entered: "A
boy is here who wants to see Miss Clara."

Clara, delighted at his interruption, said: "Can't he come right up,
Mr. Candidate?"

But the boy was already inside, and started to play. Miss Rottenmeier
was in the adjoining room when she heard the sounds. Where did they
come from? Hurrying into the study, she saw the street-boy playing to
the eager children.

"Stop! stop!" she called, but in vain, for the music drowned her
voice. Suddenly she made a big jump, for there, between her feet,
crawled a black turtle. Only when she shrieked for Sebastian could her
voice be heard. The butler came straight in, for he had seen
everything behind the door, and a great scene it had been! Glued to a
chair in her fright, Miss Rottenmeier called: "Send the boy away! Take
them away!"

Sebastian obediently pulled the boy after him; then he said: "Here are
forty pennies from Miss Clara and forty more for playing. It was well
done, my boy."

With that he closed the door behind him. Miss Rottenmeier found it
wiser now to stay in the study to prevent further disturbances.
Suddenly there was another knock at the door. Sebastian appeared with
a large basket, which had been brought for Clara.

"We had better have our lesson before we inspect it," said Miss
Rottenmeier. But Clara, turning to the tutor, asked: "Oh, please, Mr.
Candidate, can't we just peep in, to see what it is?"

"I am afraid that you will think of nothing else," the teacher began.
Just then something in the basket, which had been only lightly
fastened, moved, and one, two, three and still more little kittens
jumped out, scampering around the room with the utmost speed. They
bounded over the tutor's boots and bit his trousers; they climbed up
on Miss Rottenmeier's dress and crawled around her feet. Mewing and
running, they caused a frightful confusion. Clara called out in
delight: "Oh, look at the cunning creatures; look how they jump!
Heidi, look at that one, and oh, see the one over there?"

Heidi followed them about, while the teacher shook them off. When the
housekeeper had collected her wits after the great fright, she called
for the servants. They soon arrived and stored the little kittens
safely in the new bed.

No time had been found for yawning that day, either!

When Miss Rottenmeier, who had found out the culprit, was alone with
the children in the evening, she began severely:

"Adelheid, there is only one punishment for you. I am going to send
you to the cellar, to think over your dreadful misdeeds, in company
with the rats."

A cellar held no terrors for Heidi, for in her grandfather's cellar
fresh milk and the good cheese had been kept, and no rats had lodged
there.

But Clara shrieked: "Oh, Miss Rottenmeier, you must wait till Papa
comes home, and then he can punish Heidi."

The lady unwillingly replied: "All right, Clara, but I shall also
speak a few words to Mr. Sesemann." With those words she left the
room. Since the child's arrival everything had been upset, and the
lady often felt discouraged, though nothing remarkable happened for a
few days.

Clara, on the contrary, enjoyed her companion's society, for she
always did funny things. In her lesson she could never get her letters
straight. They meant absolutely nothing to her, except that they would
remind her of goats and eagles. The girls always spent their evenings
together, and Heidi would entertain her friend with tales of her
former life, till her longing grew so great that she added: "I have to
go home now. I must go tomorrow."

Clara's soothing words and the prospect of more rolls for the
grandmother kept the child. Every day after dinner she was left alone
in her room for some hours. Thinking of the green fields at home, of
the sparkling flowers on the mountains, she would sit in a corner till
her desire for all those things became too great to bear. Her aunt had
clearly told her that she might return, if she wished to do so, so one
day she resolved to leave for the Alm-hut. In a great hurry she packed
the bread in the red shawl, and putting on her old straw hat, started
off. The poor child did not get very far. At the door she encountered
Miss Rottenmeier, who stared at Heidi in mute surprise.

"What are you up to?" she exploded. "Haven't I forbidden you to run
away? You look like a vagabond!"

"I was only going home," whispered the frightened child.

"What, you want to run away from this house? What would Mr. Sesemann
say? What is it that does not suit you here? Don't you get better
treatment than you deserve? Have you ever before had such food,
service and such a room? Answer!"

"No," was the reply.

"Don't I know that?" the furious lady proceeded. "What a thankless
child you are, just idle and good-for-nothing!"

But Heidi could not bear it any longer. She loudly wailed: "Oh, I want
to go home. What will poor Snowhopper do without me? Grandmother is
waiting for me every day. Poor Thistlefinch gets blows if Peter gets
no cheese, and I must see the sun again when he says good-night to the
mountains. How the eagle would screech if he saw all the people here
in Frankfurt!"

"For mercy's sake, the child is crazy!" exclaimed Miss Rottenmeier,
running up the stairs. In her hurry she had bumped into Sebastian,
who was just then coming down.

"Bring the unlucky child up!" she called to him, rubbing her head.

"All right, many thanks," answered the butler, rubbing his head, too,
for he had encountered something far harder than she had.

When the butler came down, he saw Heidi standing near the door with
flaming eyes, trembling all over. Cheerfully he asked: "What has
happened, little one? Do not take it to heart, and cheer up. She
nearly made a hole in my head just now, but we must not get
discouraged. Oh, no!--Come, up with you; she said so!"

Heidi walked up-stairs very slowly. Seeing her so changed, Sebastian
said:

"Don't give in! Don't be so sad! You have been so courageous till now;
I have never heard you cry yet. Come up now, and when the lady's away
we'll go and look at the kittens. They are running round like wild!"

Nodding cheerlessly, the child disappeared in her room.

That night at supper Miss Rottenmeier watched Heidi constantly, but
nothing happened. The child sat as quiet as a mouse, hardly touching
her food, except the little roll.

Talking with the tutor next morning, Miss Rottenmeier told him her
fears about Heidi's mind. But the teacher had more serious troubles
still, for Heidi had not even learned her A,B,C in all this time.

Heidi was sorely in need of some clothes, so Clara had given her some.
Miss Rottenmeier was just busy arranging the child's wardrobe, when
she suddenly returned.

"Adelheid," she said contemptuously, "what do I find? A big pile of
bread in your wardrobe! I never heard the like. Yes, Clara, it is
true." Then, calling Tinette, she ordered her to take away the bread
and the old straw hat she had found.

"No, don't! I must keep my hat! The bread is for grandmother," cried
Heidi in despair.

"You stay here, while we take the rubbish away," said the lady
sternly.

Heidi threw herself down now on Clara's chair and sobbed as if her
heart would break.

"Now I can't bring grandmother any rolls! Oh, they were for
grandmother!" she lamented.

"Heidi, don't cry any more," Clara begged. "Listen! When you go home
some day, I am going to give you as many rolls as you had, and more.
They will be much softer and better than those stale ones you have
kept. Those were not fit to eat, Heidi. Stop now, please, and don't
cry any more!"

Only after a long, long time did Heidi become quiet. When she had
heard Clara's promise, she cried: "Are you really going to give me as
many as I had?"

At supper, Heidi's eyes were swollen and it was still hard for her to
keep from crying. Sebastian made strange signs to her that she did not
understand. What did he mean?

Later, though, when she climbed into her high bed, she found her old
beloved straw hat hidden under her cover. So Sebastian had saved it
for her and had tried to tell her! She crushed it for joy, and
wrapping it in a handkerchief, she hid it in the furthest corner of
her wardrobe.




IX

THE MASTER OF THE HOUSE HEARS OF STRANGE DOINGS


A few days afterwards there was great excitement in the Sesemann
residence, for the master of the house had just arrived. The servants
were taking upstairs one load after another, for Mr. Sesemann always
brought many lovely things home with him.

When he entered his daughter's room, Heidi shyly retreated into a
corner. He greeted Clara affectionately, and she was equally delighted
to see him, for she loved her father dearly. Then he called to Heidi:
"Oh, there is our little Swiss girl. Come and give me your hand!
That's right. Are you good friends, my girls, tell me now? You don't
fight together, what?"

"Oh, no, Clara is always kind to me," Heidi replied.

"Heidi has never even tried to fight, Papa," Clara quickly remarked.

"That's good, I like to hear that," said the father rising. "I must
get my dinner now, for I am hungry. I shall come back soon and show
you what I have brought home with me."

In the dining-room he found Miss Rottenmeier surveying the table with
a most tragic face. "You do not look very happy at my arrival, Miss
Rottenmeier. What is the matter? Clara seems well enough," he said to
her.

"Oh, Mr. Sesemann, we have been terribly disappointed," said the lady.

"How do you mean?" asked Mr. Sesemann, calmly sipping his wine.

"We had decided, as you know, to have a companion for Clara. Knowing
as I did that you would wish me to get a noble, pure child, I thought
of this Swiss child, hoping she would go through life like a breath of
pure air, hardly touching the earth."

"I think that even Swiss children are made to touch the earth,
otherwise they would have to have wings."

"I think you understand what I mean. I have been terribly
disappointed, for this child has brought the most frightful animals
into the house. Mr. Candidate can tell you!"

"The child does not look very terrible. But what do you mean?"

"I cannot explain it, because she does not seem in her right mind at
times."

Mr. Sesemann was getting worried at last, when the tutor entered.

"Oh, Mr. Candidate, I hope you will explain. Please take a cup of
coffee with me and tell me about my daughter's companion. Make it
short, if you please!"

But this was impossible for Mr. Candidate, who had to greet Mr.
Sesemann first. Then he began to reassure his host about the child,
pointing out to him that her education had been neglected till then,
and so on. But poor Mr. Sesemann, unfortunately, did not get his
answer, and had to listen to very long-winded explanations of the
child's character. At last Mr. Sesemann got up, saying: "Excuse me,
Mr. Candidate, but I must go over to Clara now."

He found the children in the study. Turning to Heidi, who had risen at
his approach, he said: "Come, little one, get me--get me a glass of
water."

"Fresh water?"

"Of course, fresh water," he replied. When Heidi had gone, he sat down
near Clara, holding her hand. "Tell me, little Clara," he asked,
"please tell me clearly what animals Heidi has brought into the house;
is she really not right in her mind?"

Clara now began to relate to her father all the incidents with the
kittens and the turtle, and explained Heidi's speeches that had so
frightened the lady. Mr. Sesemann laughed heartily and asked Clara if
she wished Heidi to remain.

"Of course, Papa. Since she is here, something amusing happens every
day; it used to be so dull, but now Heidi keeps me company."

"Very good, very good, Clara; Oh! Here is your friend back again. Did
you get nice fresh water?" asked Mr. Sesemann.

Heidi handed him the glass and said: "Yes, fresh from the fountain."

"You did not go to the fountain yourself, Heidi?" said Clara.

"Certainly, but I had to get it from far, there were so many people at
the first and at the second fountain. I had to go down another street
and there I got it. A gentleman with white hair sends his regards to
you, Mr. Sesemann."

Clara's father laughed and asked: "Who was the gentleman?"

"When he passed by the fountain and saw me there with a glass, he
stood still and said: 'Please give me to drink, for you have a glass;
to whom are you bringing the water?' Then I said: 'I am bringing it to
Mr. Sesemann.' When he heard that he laughed very loud and gave me his
regards for you, with the wish that you would enjoy your drink."

"I wonder who it was? What did the gentleman look like?"

"He has a friendly laugh and wears a gold pendant with a red stone on
his thick gold chain; there is a horsehead on his cane."

"Oh, that was the doctor--" "That was my old doctor," exclaimed father
and daughter at the same time.

In the evening, Mr. Sesemann told Miss Rottenmeier that Heidi was
going to remain, for the children were very fond of each other and he
found Heidi normal and very sweet. "I want the child to be treated
kindly," Mr. Sesemann added decidedly. "Her peculiarities must not be
punished. My mother is coming very soon to stay here, and she will
help you to manage the child, for there is nobody in this world that
my mother could not get along with, as you know, Miss Rottenmeier."

"Of course, I know that, Mr. Sesemann," replied the lady, but she was
not very much pleased at the prospect.

Mr. Sesemann only stayed two weeks, for his business called him back
to Paris. He consoled his daughter by telling her that his mother was
coming in a very few days. Mr. Sesemann had hardly left, when the
grandmother's visit was announced for the following day.

Clara was looking forward to this visit, and told Heidi so much about
her dear grandmama that Heidi also began to call her by that name, to
Miss Rottenmeier's disapproval, who thought that the child was not
entitled to this intimacy.

[Illustration]




X

A GRANDMAMA


The following evening great expectation reigned in the house. Tinette
had put on a new cap, Sebastian was placing footstools in front of
nearly every armchair, and Miss Rottenmeier walked with great dignity
about the house, inspecting everything.

When the carriage at last drove up, the servants flew downstairs,
followed by Miss Rottenmeier in more measured step. Heidi had been
sent to her room to await further orders, but it was not long before
Tinette opened the door and said brusquely: "Go into the study!"

The grandmama, with her kind and loving way, immediately befriended
the child and made her feel as if she had known her always. To the
housekeeper's great mortification, she called the child Heidi,
remarking to Miss Rottenmeier: "If somebody's name is Heidi, I call
her so."

The housekeeper soon found that she had to respect the grandmother's
ways and opinions. Mrs. Sesemann always knew what was going on in the
house the minute she entered it. On the following afternoon Clara was
resting and the old lady had shut her eyes for five minutes, when she
got up again and went into the dining-room. With a suspicion that the
housekeeper was probably asleep, she went to this lady's room,
knocking loudly on the door. After a while somebody stirred inside,
and with a bewildered face Miss Rottenmeier appeared, staring at the
unexpected visitor.

"Rottenmeier, where is the child? How does she pass her time? I want
to know," said Mrs. Sesemann.

"She just sits in her room, not moving a finger; she has not the
slightest desire to do something useful, and that is why she thinks of
such absurd things that one can hardly mention them in polite
society."

"I should do exactly the same thing, if I were left alone like that.
Please bring her to my room now, I want to show her some pretty books
I have brought with me."

"That is just the trouble. What should she do with books? In all this
time she has not even learned the A,B,C for it is impossible to instil
any knowledge into this being. If Mr. Candidate was not as patient as
an angel, he would have given up teaching her long ago."

"How strange! The child does not look to me like one who cannot learn
the A,B,C," said Mrs. Sesemann. "Please fetch her now; we can look at
the pictures anyway."

The housekeeper was going to say more, but the old lady had turned
already and gone to her room. She was thinking over what she had heard
about Heidi, making up her mind to look into the matter.

Heidi had come and was looking with wondering eyes at the splendid
pictures in the large books, that Grandmama was showing her. Suddenly
she screamed aloud, for there on the picture she saw a peaceful flock
grazing on a green pasture. In the middle a shepherd was standing,
leaning on his crook. The setting sun was shedding a golden light over
everything. With glowing eyes Heidi devoured the scene; but suddenly
she began to sob violently.

The grandmama took her little hand in hers and said in the most
soothing voice: "Come, child, you must not cry. Did this remind you of
something? Now stop, and I'll tell you the story to-night. There are
lovely stories in this book, that people can read and tell. Dry your
tears now, darling, I must ask you something. Stand up now and look at
me! Now we are merry again!"

Heidi did not stop at once, but the kind lady gave her ample time to
compose herself, saying from time to time: "Now it's all over. Now
we'll be merry again."

When the child was quiet at last, she said: "Tell me now how your
lessons are going. What have you learnt, child, tell me?"

"Nothing," Heidi sighed; "but I knew that I never could learn it."

"What is it that you can't learn?"

"I can't learn to read; it is too hard."

"What next? Who gave you this information?"

"Peter told me, and he tried over and over again, but he could not do
it, for it is too hard."

"Well, what kind of boy is he? Heidi, you must not believe what Peter
tells you, but try for yourself. I am sure you had your thoughts
elsewhere when Mr. Candidate showed you the letters."

"It's no use," Heidi said with such a tone as if she was resigned to
her fate.

"I am going to tell you something, Heidi," said the kind lady now.
"You have not learnt to read because you have believed what Peter
said. You shall believe me now, and I prophesy that you will learn it
in a very short time, as a great many other children do that are like
you and not like Peter. When you can read, I am going to give you this
book. You have seen the shepherd on the green pasture, and then you'll
be able to find out all the strange things that happen to him. Yes,
you can hear the whole story, and what he does with his sheep and his
goats. You would like to know, wouldn't you, Heidi?"

Heidi had listened attentively, and said now with sparkling eyes: "If
I could only read already!"

"It won't be long, I can see that. Come now and let us go to Clara."
With that they both went over to the study.

Since the day of Heidi's attempted flight a great change had come over
the child. She had realized that it would hurt her kind friends if she
tried to go home again. She knew now that she could not leave, as her
Aunt Deta had promised, for they all, especially Clara and her father
and the old lady, would think her ungrateful. But the burden grew
heavier in her heart and she lost her appetite, and got paler and
paler. She could not get to sleep at night from longing to see the
mountains with the flowers and the sunshine, and only in her dreams
she would be happy. When she woke up in the morning, she always found
herself on her high white bed, far away from home. Burying her head in
her pillow, she would often weep a long, long time.

Mrs. Sesemann had noticed the child's unhappiness, but let a few days
pass by, hoping for a change. But the change never came, and often
Heidi's eyes were red even in the early morning. So she called the
child to her room one day and said, with great sympathy in her voice:
"Tell me, Heidi, what is the matter with you? What is making you so
sad?"

But as Heidi did not want to appear thankless, she replied sadly: "I
can't tell you."

"No? Can't you tell Clara perhaps?"

"Oh, no, I can't tell anyone," Heidi said, looking so unhappy that the
old lady's heart was filled with pity.

"I tell you something, little girl," she continued. "If you have a
sorrow that you cannot tell to anyone, you can go to Our Father in
Heaven. You can tell Him everything that troubles you, and if we ask
Him He can help us and take our suffering away. Do you understand me,
child? Don't you pray every night? Don't you thank Him for all His
gifts and ask Him to protect you from evil?"

"Oh no, I never do that," replied the child.

"Have you never prayed, Heidi? Do you know what I mean?"

"I only prayed with my first grandmother, but it is so long ago, that
I have forgotten."

"See, Heidi, I understand now why you are so unhappy. We all need
somebody to help us, and just think how wonderful it is, to be able to
go to the Lord, when something distresses us and causes us pain. We
can tell Him everything and ask Him to comfort us, when nobody else
can do it. He can give us happiness and joy."

Heidi was gladdened by these tidings, and asked: "Can we tell Him
everything, everything?"

"Yes, Heidi, everything."

The child, withdrawing her hand from the grandmama, said hurriedly,
"Can I go now?"

"Yes, of course," was the reply, and with this Heidi ran to her room.
Sitting down on a stool she folded her hands and poured out her heart
to God, imploring Him to help her and let her go home to her
grandfather.

About a week later, Mr. Candidate asked to see Mrs. Sesemann, to tell
her of something unusual that had occurred. Being called to the lady's
room, he began: "Mrs. Sesemann, something has happened that I never
expected," and with many more words the happy grandmama was told that
Heidi had suddenly learned to read with the utmost correctness, most
rare with beginners.

"Many strange things happen in this world," Mrs. Sesemann remarked,
while they went over to the study to witness Heidi's new
accomplishment. Heidi was sitting close to Clara, reading her a story;
she seemed amazed at the strange, new world that had opened up before
her. At supper Heidi found the large book with the beautiful pictures
on her plate, and looking doubtfully at grandmama, she saw the old
lady nod. "Now it belongs to you, Heidi," she said.

"Forever? Also when I am going home?" Heidi inquired, confused with
joy.

"Certainly, forever!" the grandmama assured her. "Tomorrow we shall
begin to read it."

"But Heidi, you must not go home; no, not for many years," Clara
exclaimed, "especially when grandmama goes away. You must stay with
me."

Heidi still looked at her book before going to bed that night, and
this book became her dearest treasure. She would look at the beautiful
pictures and read all the stories aloud to Clara. Grandmama would
quietly listen and explain something here and there, making it more
beautiful than before. Heidi loved the pictures with the shepherd best
of all; they told the story of the prodigal son, and the child would
read and re-read it till she nearly knew it all by heart. Since Heidi
had learned to read and possessed the book, the days seemed to fly,
and the time had come near that the grandmama had fixed for her
departure.




XI

HEIDI GAINS IN SOME RESPECTS AND LOSES IN OTHERS


The grandmama sent for Heidi every day after dinner, while Clara was
resting and Miss Rottenmeier disappeared into her room. She talked to
Heidi and amused her in various ways, showing her how to make clothes
for pretty little dolls that she had brought. Unconsciously Heidi had
learned to sew, and made now the sweetest dresses and coats for the
little people out of lovely materials the grandmama would give her.
Often Heidi would read to the old lady, for the oftener she read over
the stories the dearer they became to her. The child lived everything
through with the people in the tales and was always happy to be with
them again. But she never looked really cheerful and her eyes never
sparkled merrily as before.

In the last week of Mrs. Sesemann's stay, Heidi was called again to
the old lady's room. The child entered with her beloved book under her
arm. Mrs. Sesemann drew Heidi close to her, and laying the book aside,
she said: "Come, child, and tell me why you are so sad. Do you still
have the same sorrow?"

"Yes," Heidi replied.

"Did you confide it to Our Lord?"

"Yes."

"Do you pray to Him every day that He may make you happy again and
take your affliction away?"

"Oh no, I don't pray any more."

"What do I hear, Heidi? Why don't you pray?"

"It does not help, for God has not listened. I don't wonder," she
added, "for if all the people in Frankfurt pray every night, He cannot
listen to them all. I am sure He has not heard me."

"Really? Why are you so sure?"

"Because I have prayed for the same thing many, many weeks and God has
not done what I have asked Him to."

"That is not the way, Heidi. You see, God in heaven is a good Father
to all of us, who knows what we need better than we do. When something
we ask for is not very good for us, He gives us something much better,
if we confide in Him and do not lose confidence in His love. I am sure
what you asked for was not very good for you just now; He has heard
you, for He can hear the prayers of all the people in the world at the
same time, because He is God Almighty and not a mortal like us. He
heard your prayers and said to Himself: 'Yes, Heidi shall get what she
is praying for in time.' Now, while God was looking down on you to
hear your prayers, you lost confidence and went away from Him. If God
does not hear your prayers any more, He will forget you also and let
you go. Don't you want to go back to Him, Heidi, and ask His
forgiveness? Pray to Him every day, and hope in Him, that He may bring
cheer and happiness to you."

Heidi had listened attentively; she had unbounded confidence in the
old lady, whose words had made a deep impression on her. Full of
repentance, she said: "I shall go at once and ask Our Father to pardon
me. I shall never forget Him any more!"

"That's right, Heidi; I am sure He will help you in time, if you only
trust in Him," the grandmother consoled her. Heidi went to her room
now and prayed earnestly to God that He would forgive her and fulfill
her wish.

The day of departure had come, but Mrs. Sesemann arranged everything
in such a way that the children hardly realized she was actually
going. Still everything was empty and quiet when she had gone, and the
children hardly knew how to pass their time.

Next day, Heidi came to Clara in the afternoon and said: "Can I
always, always read to you now, Clara?"

Clara assented, and Heidi began. But she did not get very far, for the
story she was reading told of a grandmother's death. Suddenly she
cried aloud: "Oh, now grandmother is dead!" and wept in the most
pitiful fashion. Whatever Heidi read always seemed real to her, and
now she thought it was her own grandmother at home. Louder and louder
she sobbed: "Now poor grandmother is dead and I can never see her any
more; and she never got one single roll!"

Clara attempted to explain the mistake, but Heidi was too much upset.
She pictured to herself how terrible it would be if her dear old
grandfather would die too while she was far away. How quiet and empty
it would be in the hut, and how lonely she would be!

Miss Rottenmeier had overheard the scene, and approaching the sobbing
child she said impatiently: "Adelheid, now you have screamed enough.
If I hear you again giving way to yourself in such a noisy fashion, I
shall take your book away forever!"

Heidi turned pale at that, for the book was her greatest treasure.
Quickly drying her tears, she choked down her sobs. After that Heidi
never cried again; often she could hardly repress her sobs and was
obliged to make the strangest faces to keep herself from crying out.
Clara often looked at her, full of surprise, but Miss Rottenmeier did
not notice them and found no occasion to carry out her threat.
However, the poor child got more cheerless every day, and looked so
thin and pale that Sebastian became worried. He tried to encourage her
at table to help herself to all the good dishes, but listlessly she
would let them pass and hardly touch them. In the evening she would
cry quietly, her heart bursting with longing to go home.

Thus the time passed by. Heidi never knew if it was summer or winter,
for the walls opposite never changed. They drove out very seldom, for
Clara was only able to go a short distance. They never saw anything
else than streets, houses and busy people; no grass, no fir-trees and
no mountains. Heidi struggled constantly against her sorrow, but in
vain. Autumn and winter had passed, and Heidi knew that the time was
coming when Peter would go up the Alp with his goats, where the
flowers were glistening in the sunshine and the mountains were all
afire. She would sit down in a corner of her room and put both hands
before her eyes, not to see the glaring sunshine on the opposite wall.
There she would remain, eating her heart away with longing, till Clara
would call for her to come.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THERE SHE WOULD REMAIN, EATING HER HEART AWAY WITH
LONGING]




XII

THE SESEMANN HOUSE IS HAUNTED


For several days Miss Rottenmeier had been wandering silently about
the house. When she went from room to room or along the corridors, she
would often glance back as if she were afraid that somebody was
following her. If she had to go to the upper floor, where the gorgeous
guest-rooms were, or to the lower story, where the big ball-room was
situated, she always told Tinette to come with her. The strange thing
was, that none of the servants dared to go anywhere alone and always
found an excuse to ask each other's company, which requests were
always granted. The cook, who had been in the house for many years,
would often shake her head and mutter: "That I should live to see
this!"

Something strange and weird was happening in the house. Every
morning, when the servants came down-stairs, they found the front door
wide open. At first everybody had thought that the house must have
been robbed, but nothing was missing. Every morning it was the same,
despite the double locks that were put on the door. At last John and
Sebastian, taking courage, prepared themselves to watch through a
night to see who was the ghost. Armed and provided with some
strengthening liquor, they repaired to a room down-stairs. First they
talked, but soon, getting sleepy, they leaned silently back in their
chairs. When the clock from the old church tower struck one, Sebastian
awoke and roused his comrade, which was no easy matter. At last,
however, John was wide awake, and together they went out into the
hall. The same moment a strong wind put out the light that John held
in his hand. Rushing back, he nearly upset Sebastian, who stood behind
him, and pulling the butler back into the room, he locked the door in
furious haste. When the light was lit again, Sebastian noticed that
John was deadly pale and trembling like an aspen leaf. Sebastian, not
having seen anything, asked anxiously: "What is the matter? What did
you see?"

"The door was open and a white form was on the stairs; it went up and
was gone in a moment," gasped John. Cold shivers ran down the butler's
back. They sat without moving till the morning came, and then,
shutting the door, they went upstairs to report to the housekeeper
what they had seen. The lady, who was waiting eagerly, heard the tale
and immediately sat down to write to Mr. Sesemann. She told him that
fright had paralyzed her fingers and that terrible things were
happening in the house. Then followed a tale of the appearance of the
ghost. Mr. Sesemann replied that he could not leave his business, and
advised Miss Rottenmeier to ask his mother to come to stay with them,
for Mrs. Sesemann would easily despatch the ghost. Miss Rottenmeier
was offended with the tone of the letter, which did not seem to take
her account seriously. Mrs. Sesemann also replied that she could not
come, so the housekeeper decided to tell the children all about it.
Clara, at the uncanny tale, immediately exclaimed that she would not
stay alone another moment and that she wished her father to come home.
The housekeeper arranged to sleep with the frightened child, while
Heidi, who did not know what ghosts were, was perfectly unmoved.
Another letter was despatched to Mr. Sesemann, telling him that the
excitement might have serious effects on his daughter's delicate
constitution, and mentioning several misfortunes that might probably
happen if he did not relieve the household from this terror.

This brought Mr. Sesemann. Going to his daughter's room after his
arrival, he was overjoyed to see her as well as ever. Clara was also
delighted to see her father.

"What new tricks has the ghost played on you, Miss Rottenmeier?" asked
Mr. Sesemann with a twinkle in his eye.

"It is no joke, Mr. Sesemann," replied the lady seriously. "I am sure
you will not laugh tomorrow. Those strange events indicate that
something secret and horrible has happened in this house in days gone
by."

"Is that so? this is new to me," remarked Mr. Sesemann. "But will you
please not suspect my venerable ancestors? Please call Sebastian; I
want to speak to him alone."

Mr. Sesemann knew that the two were not on good terms, so he said to
the butler:

"Come here, Sebastian, and tell me honestly, if you have played the
ghost for Miss Rottenmeier's pastime?"

"No, upon my word, master; you must not think that," replied Sebastian
frankly. "I do not like it quite myself."

"Well, I'll show you and John what ghosts look like by day. You ought
to be ashamed of yourselves, strong young men like you! Now go at once
to my old friend, Dr. Classen, and tell him to come to me at nine
o'clock to-night. Tell him that I came from Paris especially to
consult him, and that I want him to sit up all night with me. Do you
understand me, Sebastian?"

"Yes indeed! I shall do as you say, Mr. Sesemann." Mr. Sesemann then
went up to Clara's room to quiet and comfort her.

Punctually at nine o'clock the doctor arrived. Though his hair was
grey, his face was still fresh, and his eyes were lively and kind.
When he saw his friend, he laughed aloud and said: "Well, well, you
look pretty healthy for one who needs to be watched all night."

"Have patience, my old friend," replied Mr. Sesemann. "I am afraid the
person we have to sit up for will look worse, but first we must catch
him."

"What? Then somebody _is_ sick in this house? What do you mean?"

"Far worse, doctor, far worse. A ghost is in the house. My house is
haunted."

When the doctor laughed, Mr. Sesemann continued: "I call that
sympathy; I wish my friend Miss Rottenmeier could hear you. She is
convinced that an old Sesemann is wandering about, expiating some
dreadful deed."

"How did she make his acquaintance?" asked the doctor, much amused.

Mr. Sesemann then explained the circumstances. He said that the matter
was either a bad joke which an acquaintance of the servants was
playing in his absence, or it was a gang of thieves, who, after
intimidating the people, would surely rob his house by and by.

With these explanations they entered the room where the two servants
had watched before. A few bottles of wine stood on the table and two
bright candelabra shed a brilliant light. Two revolvers were ready for
emergencies.

They left the door only partly open, for too much light might drive
the ghost away. Then, sitting down comfortably, the two men passed
their time by chatting, taking a sip now and then.

"The ghost seems to have spied us and probably won't come to-day,"
said the doctor.

"We must have patience. It is supposed to come at one," replied his
friend.

So they talked till one o'clock. Everything was quiet, and not a sound
came from the street. Suddenly the doctor raised his finger.

"Sh! Sesemann, don't you hear something?"

While they both listened, the bar was unfastened, the key was turned,
and the door flew open. Mr. Sesemann seized his revolver.

"You are not afraid, I hope?" said the doctor, getting up.

"Better be cautious!" whispered Mr. Sesemann, seizing the candelabrum
in the other hand. The doctor followed with his revolver and the
light, and so they went out into the hall.

On the threshhold stood a motionless white form, lighted up by the
moon.

"Who is there?" thundered the doctor, approaching the figure. It
turned and uttered a low shriek. There stood Heidi, with bare feet and
in her white night-gown, looking bewildered at the bright light and
the weapons. She was shaking with fear, while the two men were looking
at her in amazement.

"Sesemann, this seems to be your little water carrier," said the
doctor.

"Child, what does this mean?" asked Mr. Sesemann. "What did you want
to do? Why have you come down here?"

Pale from fright, Heidi said: "I do not know."

The doctor came forward now. "Sesemann, this case belongs to my field.
Please go and sit down while I take her to bed."

Putting his revolver aside, he led the trembling child up-stairs.

"Don't be afraid; just be quiet! Everything is all right; don't be
frightened."

When they had arrived in Heidi's room, the doctor put the little girl
to bed, covering her up carefully. Drawing a chair near the couch, he
waited till Heidi had calmed down and had stopped trembling. Then
taking her hand in his, he said kindly: "Now everything is all right
again. Tell me where you wanted to go?"

"I did not want to go anywhere," Heidi assured him; "I did not go
myself, only I was there all of a sudden."

"Really! Tell me, what did you dream?"

"Oh, I have the same dream every night. I always think I am with my
grandfather again and can hear the fir-trees roar. I always think how
beautiful the stars must be, and then I open the door of the hut, and
oh, it is so wonderful! But when I wake up I am always in Frankfurt."
Heidi had to fight the sobs that were rising in her throat.

"Does your back or your head hurt you, child?"

"No, but I feel as if a big stone was pressing me here."

"As if you had eaten something that disagreed with you?"

"Oh no, but as if I wanted to cry hard."

"So, and then you cry out, don't you?"

"Oh no, I must never do that, for Miss Rottenmeier has forbidden it."

"Then you swallow it down? Yes? Do you like to be here?"

"Oh yes," was the faint, uncertain reply.

"Where did you live with your grandfather?"

"Up on the Alp."

"But wasn't it a little lonely there?"

"Oh no, it was so beautiful!"--But Heidi could say no more. The
recollection, the excitement of the night and all the restrained
sorrow overpowered the child. The tears rushed violently from her eyes
and she broke out into loud sobs.

The doctor rose, and soothing her, said: "It won't hurt to cry; you'll
go to sleep afterward, and when you wake up everything will come
right." Then he left the room.

Joining his anxious friend down-stairs, he said: "Sesemann, the little
girl is a sleep-walker, and has unconsciously scared your whole
household. Besides, she is so home-sick that her little body has
wasted away. We shall have to act quickly. The only remedy for her is
to be restored to her native mountain air. This is my prescription,
and she must go tomorrow."

"What, sick, a sleep-walker, and wasted away in my house! Nobody even
suspected it! You think I should send this child back in this
condition, when she has come in good health? No, doctor, ask
everything but that. Take her in hand and prescribe for her, but let
her get well before I send her back."

"Sesemann," the doctor replied seriously, "just think what you are
doing. We cannot cure her with powders and pills. The child has not a
strong constitution, and if you keep her here, she might never get
well again. If you restore her to the bracing mountain air to which
she is accustomed, she probably will get perfectly well again."

When Mr. Sesemann heard this he said, "If that is your advice, we must
act at once; this is the only way then." With these words Mr. Sesemann
took his friend's arm and walked about with him to talk the matter
over. When everything was settled, the doctor took his leave, for the
morning had already come and the sun was shining in through the door.




XIII

UP THE ALP ON A SUMMER EVENING


Mr. Sesemann, going upstairs in great agitation, knocked at the
housekeeper's door. He asked her to hurry, for preparations for a
journey had to be made. Miss Rottenmeier obeyed the summons with the
greatest indignation, for it was only half-past four in the morning.
She dressed in haste, though with great difficulty, being nervous and
excited. All the other servants were summoned likewise, and one and
all thought that the master of the house had been seized by the ghost
and that he was ringing for help. When they had all come down with
terrified looks, they were most surprised to see Mr. Sesemann fresh
and cheerful, giving orders. John was sent to get the horses ready and
Tinette was told to prepare Heidi for her departure while Sebastian
was commissioned to fetch Heidi's aunt. Mr. Sesemann instructed the
housekeeper to pack a trunk in all haste for Heidi.

Miss Rottenmeier experienced an extreme disappointment, for she had
hoped for an explanation of the great mystery. But Mr. Sesemann,
evidently not in the mood to converse further, went to his daughter's
room. Clara had been wakened by the unusual noises and was listening
eagerly. Her father told her of what had happened and how the doctor
had ordered Heidi back to her home, because her condition was serious
and might get worse. She might even climb the roof, or be exposed to
similar dangers, if she was not cured at once.

Clara was painfully surprised and tried to prevent her father from
carrying out his plan. He remained firm, however, promising to take
her to Switzerland himself the following summer, if she was good and
sensible now. So the child, resigning herself, begged to have Heidi's
trunk packed in her room. Mr. Sesemann encouraged her to get together
a good outfit for her little friend.

Heidi's aunt had arrived in the meantime. Being told to take her niece
home with her, she found no end of excuses, which plainly showed that
she did not want to do it; for Deta well remembered the uncle's
parting words. Mr. Sesemann dismissed her and summoned Sebastian. The
butler was told to get ready for travelling with the child. He was to
go to Basle that day and spend the night at a good hotel which his
master named. The next day the child was to be brought to her home.

"Listen, Sebastian," Mr. Sesemann said, "and do exactly as I tell you.
I know the Hotel in Basle, and if you show my card they will give you
good accommodations. Go to the child's room and barricade the windows,
so that they can only be opened by the greatest force. When Heidi has
gone to bed, lock the door from outside, for the child walks in her
sleep and might come to harm in the strange hotel. She might get up
and open the door; do you understand?"

"Oh!--Oh!--So it was she?" exclaimed the butler.

"Yes, it was! You are a coward, and you can tell John he is the same.
Such foolish men, to be afraid!" With that Mr. Sesemann went to his
room to write a letter to Heidi's grandfather.

Sebastian, feeling ashamed, said to himself that he ought to have
resisted John and found out alone.

Heidi was dressed in her Sunday frock and stood waiting for further
commands.

Mr. Sesemann called her now. "Good-morning, Mr. Sesemann," Heidi said
when she entered.

"What do you think about it, little one?" he asked her. Heidi looked
up to him in amazement.

"You don't seem to know anything about it," laughed Mr. Sesemann.
Tinette had not even told the child, for she thought it beneath her
dignity to speak to the vulgar Heidi.

"You are going home to-day."

"Home?" Heidi repeated in a low voice. She had to gasp, so great was
her surprise.

"Wouldn't you like to hear something about it?" asked Mr. Sesemann
smiling.

"Oh yes, I should like to," said the blushing child.

"Good, good," said the kind gentleman. "Sit down and eat a big
breakfast now, for you are going away right afterwards."

The child could not even swallow a morsel, though she tried to eat out
of obedience. It seemed to her as if it was only a dream.

"Go to Clara, Heidi, till the carriage comes," Mr. Sesemann said
kindly.

Heidi had been wishing to go, and now she ran to Clara's room, where a
huge trunk was standing.

"Heidi, look at the things I had packed for you. Do you like them?"
Clara asked.

There were a great many lovely things in it, but Heidi jumped for joy
when she discovered a little basket with twelve round white rolls for
the grandmother. The children had forgotten that the moment for
parting had come, when the carriage was announced. Heidi had to get
all her own treasures from her room yet. The grandmama's book was
carefully packed, and the red shawl that Miss Rottenmeier had
purposely left behind. Then putting on her pretty hat, she left her
room to say good-bye to Clara. There was not much time left to do so,
for Mr. Sesemann was waiting to put Heidi in the carriage. When Miss
Rottenmeier, who was standing on the stairs to bid farewell to her
pupil, saw the red bundle in Heidi's hand, she seized it and threw it
on the ground. Heidi looked imploringly at her kind protector, and Mr.
Sesemann, seeing how much she treasured it, gave it back to her. The
happy child at parting thanked him for all his goodness. She also sent
a message of thanks to the good old doctor, whom she suspected to be
the real cause of her going.

While Heidi was being lifted into the carriage, Mr. Sesemann assured
her that Clara and he would never forget her. Sebastian followed with
Heidi's basket and a large bag with provisions. Mr. Sesemann called
out: "Happy journey!" and the carriage rolled away.

Only when Heidi was sitting in the train did she become conscious of
where she was going. She knew now that she would really see her
grandfather and the grandmother again, also Peter and the goats. Her
only fear was that the poor blind grandmother might have died while
she was away.

The thing she looked forward to most was giving the soft white rolls
to the grandmother. While she was musing over all these things, she
fell asleep. In Basle she was roused by Sebastian, for there they were
to spend the night.

The next morning they started off again, and it took them many hours
before they reached Mayenfeld. When Sebastian stood on the platform of
the station, he wished he could have travelled further in the train
rather than have to climb a mountain. The last part of the trip might
be dangerous, for everything seemed half-wild in this country. Looking
round, he discovered a small wagon with a lean horse. A
broad-shouldered man was just loading up large bags, which had come by
the train. Sebastian, approaching the man, asked some information
concerning the least dangerous ascent to the Alp. After a while it was
settled that the man should take Heidi and her trunk to the village
and see to it that somebody would go up with her from there.

Not a word had escaped Heidi, until she now said, "I can go up alone
from the village. I know the road." Sebastian felt relieved, and
calling Heidi to him, presented her with a heavy roll of bills and a
letter for the grandfather. These precious things were put at the
bottom of the basket, under the rolls, so that they could not possibly
get lost.

Heidi promised to be careful of them, and was lifted up to the cart.
The two old friends shook hands and parted, and Sebastian, with a
slightly bad conscience for having deserted the child so soon, sat
down on the station to wait for a returning train.

The driver was no other than the village baker, who had never seen
Heidi but had heard a great deal about her. He had known her parents
and immediately guessed she was the child who had lived with the
Alm-Uncle. Curious to know why she came home again, he began a
conversation.

"Are you Heidi, the child who lived with the Alm-Uncle?"

"Yes."

"Why are you coming home again? Did you get on badly?"

"Oh no; nobody could have got on better than I did in Frankfurt."

"Then why are you coming back?"

"Because Mr. Sesemann let me come."

"Pooh! why didn't you stay?"

"Because I would rather be with my grandfather on the Alp than
anywhere on earth."

"You may think differently when you get there," muttered the baker.
"It is strange though, for she must know," he said to himself.

They conversed no more, and Heidi began to tremble with excitement
when she recognized all the trees on the road and the lofty peaks of
the mountains. Sometimes she felt as if she could not sit still any
longer, but had to jump down and run with all her might. They arrived
at the village at the stroke of five. Immediately a large group of
women and children surrounded the cart, for the trunk and the little
passenger had attracted everybody's notice. When Heidi had been lifted
down, she found herself held and questioned on all sides. But when
they saw how frightened she was, they let her go at last. The baker
had to tell of Heidi's arrival with the strange gentleman, and assured
all the people that Heidi loved her grandfather with all her heart,
let the people say what they would about him.

Heidi, in the meantime, was running up the path; from time to time she
was obliged to stop, for her basket was heavy and she lost her
breath. Her one idea was: "If only grandmother still sits in her
corner by her spinning wheel!--Oh, if she should have died!" When the
child caught sight of the hut at last, her heart began to beat. The
quicker she ran, the more it beat, but at last she tremblingly opened
the door. She ran into the middle of the room, unable to utter one
tone, she was so out of breath.

"Oh God," it sounded from one corner, "our Heidi used to come in like
that. Oh, if I just could have her again with me before I die. Who has
come?"

"Here I am! grandmother, here I am!" shouted the child, throwing
herself on her knees before the old woman. She seized her hands and
arms and snuggling up to her did not for joy utter one more word. The
grandmother had been so surprised that she could only silently caress
the child's curly hair over and over again. "Yes, yes," she said at
last, "this is Heidi's hair, and her beloved voice. Oh my God, I thank
Thee for this happiness." Out of her blind eyes big tears of joy fell
down on Heidi's hand. "Is it really you, Heidi? Have you really come
again?"

"Yes, yes, grandmother," the child replied. "You must not cry, for I
have come and will never leave you any more. Now you won't have to eat
hard black bread any more for a little while. Look what I have brought
you."

Heidi put one roll after another into the grandmother's lap.

"Ah, child, what a blessing you bring to me!" the old woman cried.
"But you are my greatest blessing yourself, Heidi!" Then, caressing
the child's hair and flushed cheeks, she entreated: "Just say one more
word, that I may hear your voice."

While Heidi was talking, Peter's mother arrived, and exclaimed in her
amazement: "Surely, this is Heidi. But how can that be?"

The child rose to shake hands with Brigida, who could not get over
Heidi's splendid frock and hat.

"You can have my hat, I don't want it any more; I have my old one
still," Heidi said, pulling out her old crushed straw hat. Heidi had
remembered her grandfather's words to Deta about her feather hat; that
was why she had kept her old hat so carefully. Brigida at last
accepted the gift after a great many remonstrances. Suddenly Heidi
took off her pretty dress and tied her old shawl about her. Taking the
grandmother's hand, she said: "Good-bye, I must go home to grandfather
now, but I shall come again tomorrow. Good-night, grandmother."

"Oh, please come again to-morrow, Heidi," implored the old woman,
while she held her fast.

"Why did you take your pretty dress off?" asked Brigida.

"I'd rather go to grandfather that way, or else he might not know me
any more, the way you did."

Brigida accompanied the child outside and said mysteriously: "He would
have known you in your frock; you ought to have kept it on. Please be
careful, child, for Peter tells us that the uncle never says a word
to anyone and always seems so angry." But Heidi was unconcerned, and
saying good-night, climbed up the path with the basket on her arm. The
evening sun was shining down on the grass before her. Every few
minutes Heidi stood still to look at the mountains behind her.
Suddenly she looked back and beheld such glory as she had not even
seen in her most vivid dream. The rocky peaks were flaming in the
brilliant light, the snow-fields glowed and rosy clouds were floating
overhead. The grass was like an expanse of gold, and below her the
valley swam in golden mist. The child stood still, and in her joy and
transport tears ran down her cheeks. She folded her hands, and looking
up to heaven, thanked the Lord that He had brought her home again. She
thanked Him for restoring her to her beloved mountains,--in her
happiness she could hardly find words to pray. Only when the glow had
subsided, was Heidi able to follow the path again.

[Illustration: THROWING HERSELF IN HER GRANDFATHER'S ARMS, SHE HELD
HIM TIGHT]

She climbed so fast that she could soon discover, first the tree-tops,
then the roof, finally the hut. Now she could see her grandfather
sitting on his bench, smoking a pipe. Above the cottage the fir-trees
gently swayed and rustled in the evening breeze. At last she had
reached the hut, and throwing herself in her grandfather's arms, she
hugged him and held him tight. She could say nothing but "Grandfather!
grandfather! grandfather!" in her agitation.

The old man said nothing either, but his eyes were moist, and
loosening Heidi's arms at last, he sat her on his knee. When he had
looked at her a while, he said: "So you have come home again, Heidi?
Why? You certainly do not look very cityfied! Did they send you away?"

"Oh no, you must not think that, grandfather. They all were so good to
me; Clara, Mr. Sesemann and grandmama. But grandfather, sometimes I
felt as if I could not bear it any longer to be away from you! I
thought I should choke; I could not tell any one, for that would have
been ungrateful. Suddenly, one morning Mr. Sesemann called me very
early, I think it was the doctor's fault and--but I think it is
probably written in this letter;" with that Heidi brought the letter
and the bank-roll from her basket, putting them on her grandfather's
lap.

"This belongs to you," he said, laying the roll beside him. Having
read the letter, he put it in his pocket.

"Do you think you can still drink milk with me, Heidi?" he asked,
while he stepped into the cottage. "Take your money with you, you can
buy a bed for it and clothes for many years."

"I don't need it at all, grandfather," Heidi assured him; "I have a
bed and Clara has given me so many dresses that I shan't need any more
all my life."

"Take it and put it in the cupboard, for you will need it some day."

Heidi obeyed, and danced around the hut in her delight to see all the
beloved things again. Running up to the loft, she exclaimed in great
disappointment: "Oh grandfather, my bed is gone."

"It will come again," the grandfather called up from below; "how could
I know that you were coming back? Get your milk now!"

Heidi, coming down, took her old seat. She seized her bowl and emptied
it eagerly, as if it was the most wonderful thing she had ever tasted.
"Grandfather, our milk is the best in all the world."

Suddenly Heidi, hearing a shrill whistle, rushed outside, as Peter and
all his goats came racing down. Heidi greeted the boy, who stopped,
rooted to the spot, staring at her. Then she ran into the midst of her
beloved friends, who had not forgotten her either. Schwänli and Bärli
bleated for joy, and all her other favorites pressed near to her.
Heidi was beside herself with joy, and caressed little Snowhopper and
patted Thistlefinch, till she felt herself pushed to and fro among
them.

"Peter, why don't you come down and say good-night to me?" Heidi
called to the boy.

"Have you come again?" he exclaimed at last. Then he took Heidi's
proffered hand and asked her, as if she had been always there: "Are
you coming up with me to-morrow?"

"No, to-morrow I must go to grandmother, but perhaps the day after."

Peter had a hard time with his goats that day, for they would not
follow him. Over and over again they came back to Heidi, till she
entered the shed with Bärli and Schwänli and shut the door.

When Heidi went up to her loft to sleep, she found a fresh, fragrant
bed waiting for her; and she slept better that night than she had for
many, many months, for her great and burning longing had been
satisfied. About ten times that night the grandfather rose from his
couch to listen to Heidi's quiet breathing. The window was filled up
with hay, for from now on the moon was not allowed to shine on Heidi
any more. But Heidi slept quietly, for she had seen the flaming
mountains and had heard the fir-trees roar.




XIV

ON SUNDAY WHEN THE CHURCH BELLS RING


Heidi was standing under the swaying fir-trees, waiting for her
grandfather to join her. He had promised to bring up her trunk from
the village while she went in to visit the grandmother. The child was
longing to see the blind woman again and to hear how she had liked the
rolls. It was Saturday, and the grandfather had been cleaning the
cottage. Soon he was ready to start. When they had descended and Heidi
entered Peter's hut, the grandmother called lovingly to her: "Have you
come again, child?"

She took hold of Heidi's hand and held it tight. Grandmother then told
the little visitor how good the rolls had tasted, and how much
stronger she felt already. Brigida related further that the
grandmother had only eaten a single roll, being so afraid to finish
them too soon. Heidi had listened attentively, and said now:
"Grandmother, I know what I shall do. I am going to write to Clara and
she'll surely send me a whole lot more."

But Brigida remarked: "That is meant well, but they get hard so soon.
If I only had a few extra pennies, I could buy some from our baker. He
makes them too, but I am hardly able to pay for the black bread."

Heidi's face suddenly shone. "Oh, grandmother, I have an awful lot of
money," she cried. "Now I know what I'll do with it. Every day you
must have a fresh roll and two on Sundays. Peter can bring them up
from the village."

"No, no, child," the grandmother implored. "That must not be. You must
give it to grandfather and he'll tell you what to do with it."

But Heidi did not listen but jumped gaily about the little room,
calling over and over again: "Now grandmother can have a roll every
day. She'll get well and strong, and," she called with fresh delight,
"maybe your eyes will see again, too, when you are strong and well."

The grandmother remained silent, not to mar the happiness of the
child. Seeing the old hymn-book on the shelf, Heidi said:

"Grandmother, shall I read you a song from your book now? I can read
quite nicely!" she added after a pause.

"Oh yes, I wish you would, child. Can you really read?"

Heidi, climbing on a chair, took down the dusty book from a shelf.
After she had carefully wiped it off, she sat down on a stool.

"What shall I read, grandmother?"

"Whatever you want to," was the reply. Turning the pages, Heidi found
a song about the sun, and decided to read that aloud. More and more
eagerly she read, while the grandmother, with folded arms, sat in her
chair. An expression of indescribable happiness shone in her
countenance, though tears were rolling down her cheeks. When Heidi
had repeated the end of the song a number of times, the old woman
exclaimed: "Oh, Heidi, everything seems bright to me again and my
heart is light. Thank you, child, you have done me so much good."

Heidi looked enraptured at the grandmother's face, which had changed
from an old, sorrowful expression to a joyous one.

She seemed to look up gratefully, as if she could already behold the
lovely, celestial gardens told of in the hymn.

Soon the grandfather knocked on the window, for it was time to go.
Heidi followed quickly, assuring the grandmother that she would visit
her every day now; on the days she went up to the pasture with Peter,
she would return in the early afternoon, for she did not want to miss
the chance to make the grandmother's heart joyful and light. Brigida
urged Heidi to take her dress along, and with it on her arm the child
joined the old man and immediately told him what had happened.

On hearing of her plan to purchase rolls for the grandmother every
day, the grandfather reluctantly consented.

At this the child gave a bound, shouting: "Oh grandfather, now
grandmother won't ever have to eat hard, black bread any more. Oh,
everything is so wonderful now! If God Our Father had done immediately
what I prayed for, I should have come home at once and could not have
brought half as many rolls to grandmother. I should not have been able
to read either. Grandmama told me that God would make everything much
better than I could ever dream. I shall always pray from now on, the
way grandmama taught me. When God does not give me something I pray
for, I shall always remember how everything has worked out for the
best this time. We'll pray every day, grandfather, won't we, for
otherwise God might forget us."

"And if somebody should forget to do it?" murmured the old man.

"Oh, he'll get on badly, for God will forget him, too. If he is
unhappy and wretched, people don't pity him, for they will say: 'he
went away from God, and now the Lord, who alone can help him, has no
pity on him'."

"Is that true, Heidi? Who told you so?"

"Grandmama explained it all to me."

After a pause the grandfather said: "Yes, but if it has happened, then
there is no help; nobody can come back to the Lord, when God has once
forgotten him."

"But grandfather, everybody can come back to Him; grandmama told me
that, and besides there is the beautiful story in my book. Oh,
grandfather, you don't know it yet, and I shall read it to you as soon
as we get home."

The grandfather had brought a big basket with him, in which he carried
half the contents of Heidi's trunk; it had been too large to be
conveyed up the steep ascent. Arriving at the hut and setting down his
load, he had to sit beside Heidi, who was ready to begin the tale.
With great animation Heidi read the story of the prodigal son, who
was happy at home with his father's cows and sheep. The picture showed
him leaning on his staff, watching the sunset. "Suddenly he wanted to
have his own inheritance, and be able to be his own master. Demanding
the money from his father, he went away and squandered all. When he
had nothing in the world left, he had to go as servant to a peasant,
who did not own fine cattle like his father, but only swine; his
clothes were rags, and for food he only got the husks on which the
pigs were fed. Often he would think what a good home he had left, and
when he remembered how good his father had been to him and his own
ungratefulness, he would cry from repentance and longing. Then he said
to himself: 'I shall go to my father and ask his forgiveness.' When he
approached his former home, his father came out to meet him--"

"What do you think will happen now?" Heidi asked. "You think that the
father is angry and will say: 'Didn't I tell you?' But just listen:
'And his father saw him and had compassion and ran and fell on his
neck. And the son said: Father, I have sinned against Heaven and in
Thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called Thy son. But the father
said to his servants: Bring forth the best robe and put it on him; and
put a ring on his hand and shoes on his feet; and bring hither the
fatted calf and kill it; and let us eat and be merry: For this my son
was dead and is alive again; he was lost, and is found.' And they
began to be merry."

"Isn't it a beautiful story, grandfather?" asked Heidi, when he sat
silently beside her.

"Yes, Heidi, it is," said the grandfather, but so seriously that Heidi
quietly looked at the pictures. "Look how happy he is," she said,
pointing to it.

A few hours later, when Heidi was sleeping soundly, the old man
climbed up the ladder. Placing a little lamp beside the sleeping
child, he watched her a long, long time. Her little hands were folded
and her rosy face looked confident and peaceful. The old man now
folded his hands and said in a low voice, while big tears rolled down
his cheeks: "Father, I have sinned against Heaven and Thee, and am no
more worthy to be Thy son!"

The next morning found the uncle standing before the door, looking
about him over valley and mountain. A few early bells sounded from
below and the birds sang their morning anthems.

Re-entering the house, he called: "Heidi, get up! The sun is shining!
Put on a pretty dress, for we are going to church!"

That was a new call, and Heidi obeyed quickly. When the child came
downstairs in her smart little frock, she opened her eyes wide. "Oh,
grandfather!" she exclaimed, "I have never seen you in your Sunday
coat with the silver buttons. Oh, how fine you look!"

The old man, turning to the child, said with a smile: "You look nice,
too; come now!" With Heidi's hand in his they wandered down together.
The nearer they came to the village, the louder and richer the bells
resounded. "Oh grandfather, do you hear it? It seems like a big, high
feast," said Heidi.

When they entered the church, all the people were singing. Though they
sat down on the last bench behind, the people had noticed their
presence and whispered it from ear to ear. When the pastor began to
preach, his words were a loud thanksgiving that moved all his hearers.
After the service the old man and the child walked to the parsonage.
The clergyman had opened the door and received them with friendly
words. "I have come to ask your forgiveness for my harsh words," said
the uncle. "I want to follow your advice to spend the winter here
among you. If the people look at me askance, I can't expect any
better. I am sure, Mr. Pastor, you will not do so."

   [Illustration: WITH HEIDI'S HAND IN HIS THEY WANDERED DOWN
   TOGETHER]

The pastor's friendly eyes sparkled, and with many a kind word he
commended the uncle for this change, and putting his hand on Heidi's
curly hair, ushered them out. Thus the people, who had been all
talking together about this great event, could see that their
clergyman shook hands with the old man. The door of the parsonage was
hardly shut, when the whole assembly came forward with outstretched
hands and friendly greetings. Great seemed to be their joy at the old
man's resolution; some of the people even accompanied him on his
homeward way. When they had parted at last, the uncle looked after
them with his face shining as with an inward light. Heidi looked up to
him and said: "Grandfather, you have never looked so beautiful!"

"Do you think so, child?" he said with a smile. "You see, Heidi, I am
more happy than I deserve; to be at peace with God and men makes one's
heart feel light. God has been good to me, to send you back."

When they arrived at Peter's hut, the grandfather opened the door and
entered. "How do you do, grandmother," he called out. "I think we
must start to mend again, before the fall wind comes."

"Oh my God, the uncle!" exclaimed the grandmother in joyous surprise.
"How happy I am to be able to thank you for what you have done, uncle!
Thank you, God bless you for it."

With trembling joy the grandmother shook hands with her old friend.
"There is something else I want to say to you, uncle," she continued.
"If I have ever hurt you in any way, do not punish me. Do not let
Heidi go away again before I die. I cannot tell you what Heidi means
to me!" So saying, she held the clinging child to her.

"No danger of that, grandmother, I hope we shall all stay together now
for many years to come."

Brigida now showed Heidi's feather hat to the old man and asked him to
take it back. But the uncle asked her to keep it, since Heidi had
given it to her.

"What blessings this child has brought from Frankfurt," Brigida said.
"I often wondered if I should not send our little Peter too. What do
you think, uncle?"

The uncle's eyes sparkled with fun, when he replied: "I am sure it
would not hurt Peter; nevertheless I should wait for a fitting
occasion before I sent him."

The next moment Peter himself arrived in great haste. He had a letter
for Heidi, which had been given to him in the village. What an event,
a letter for Heidi! They all sat down at the table while the child
read it aloud. The letter was from Clara Sesemann, who wrote that
everything had got so dull since Heidi left. She said that she could
not stand it very long, and therefore her father had promised to take
her to Ragatz this coming fall. She announced that Grandmama was
coming too, for she wanted to see Heidi and her grandfather.
Grandmama, having heard about the rolls, was sending some coffee, too,
so that the grandmother would not have to eat them dry. Grandmama
also insisted on being taken to the grandmother herself when she came
on her visit.

Great was the delight caused by this news, and what with all the
questions and plans that followed, the grandfather himself forgot how
late it was. This happy day, which had united them all, caused the old
woman to say at parting: "The most beautiful thing of all, though, is
to be able to shake hands again with an old friend, as in days gone
by; it is a great comfort to find again, what we have treasured. I
hope you'll come soon again, uncle. I am counting on the child for
tomorrow."

This promise was given. While Heidi and her grandfather were on their
homeward path, the peaceful sound of evening bells accompanied them.
At last they reached the cottage, which seemed to glow in the evening
light.




Part II

Heidi Makes Use of Her Experience


[Illustration]




XV

PREPARATIONS FOR A JOURNEY


The kind doctor who had sent Heidi home to her beloved mountains was
approaching the Sesemann residence on a sunny day in September.
Everything about him was bright and cheerful, but the doctor did not
even raise his eyes from the pavement to the blue sky above. His face
was sad and his hair had turned very gray since spring. A few months
ago the doctor had lost his only daughter, who had lived with him
since his wife's early death. The blooming girl had been his only joy,
and since she had gone from him the ever-cheerful doctor was bowed
down with grief.

When Sebastian opened the door to the physician he bowed very low, for
the doctor made friends wherever he went.

"I am glad you have come doctor," Mr. Sesemann called to his friend as
he entered. "Please let us talk over this trip to Switzerland again.
Do you still give the same advice, now that Clara is so much better?"

"What must I think of you, Sesemann?" replied the doctor, sitting
down. "I wish your mother was here. Everything is clear to her and
things go smoothly then. This is the third time to-day that you have
called me, and always for the same thing!"

"It is true, it must make you impatient," said Mr. Sesemann. Laying
his hand on his friend's shoulder, he continued: "I cannot say how
hard it is for me to refuse Clara this trip. Haven't I promised it to
her and hasn't she looked forward to it for months? She has borne all
her suffering so patiently, just because she had hoped to be able to
visit her little friend on the Alp. I hate to rob her of this
pleasure. The poor child has so many trials and so little change."

"But, Sesemann, you must do it," was the doctor's answer. When his
friend remained silent, he continued: "Just think what a hard summer
Clara has had! She never was more ill and we could not attempt this
journey without risking the worst consequences. Remember, we are in
September now, and though the weather may still be fine on the Alp, it
is sure to be very cool. The days are getting short, and she could
only spend a few hours up there, if she had to return for the night.
It would take several hours to have her carried up from Ragatz. You
see yourself how impossible it is! I shall come in with you, though,
to talk to Clara, and you'll find her sensible. I'll tell you of my
plan for next May. First she can go to Ragatz to take the baths. When
it gets warm on the mountain, she can be carried up from time to time.
She'll be stronger then and much more able to enjoy those excursions
than she is now. If we hope for an improvement in her condition, we
must be extremely cautious and careful, remember that!"

Mr. Sesemann, who had been listening with the utmost submission, now
said anxiously: "Doctor, please tell me honestly if you still have
hope left for any change?"

With shrugging shoulders the doctor replied: "Not very much. But think
of me, Sesemann! Have you not a child, who loves you and always
welcomes you? You don't have to come back to a lonely house and sit
down alone at your table. Your child is well taken care of, and if she
has many privations, she also has many advantages. Sesemann, you do
not need to be pitied! Just think of my lonely home!"

Mr. Sesemann had gotten up and was walking round the room, as he
always did when something occupied his thoughts. Suddenly he stood
before his friend and said: "Doctor, I have an idea. I cannot see you
sad any longer. You must get away. You shall undertake this trip and
visit Heidi in our stead."

The doctor had been surprised by this proposal, and tried to object.
But Mr. Sesemann was so full of his new project that he pulled his
friend with him into his daughter's room, not leaving him time for any
remonstrances. Clara loved the doctor, who had always tried to cheer
her up on his visits by bright and funny tales. She was sorry for the
change that had come over him and would have given much to see him
happy again. When he had shaken hands with her, both men pulled up
their chairs to Clara's bedside. Mr. Sesemann began to speak of their
journey and how sorry he was to give it up. Then he quickly began to
talk of his new plan.

Clara's eyes had filled with tears. But she knew that her father did
not like to see her cry, and besides she was sure that her papa would
only forbid her this pleasure because it was absolutely necessary to
do so.

So she bravely fought her tears, and caressing the doctor's hand,
said:

"Oh please, doctor, do go to Heidi; then you can tell me all about
her, and can describe her grandfather to me, and Peter, with his
goats,--I seem to know them all so well. Then you can take all the
things to her that I had planned to take myself. Oh, please doctor,
go, and then I'll be good and take as much cod-liver oil as ever you
want me to."

Who can tell if this promise decided the doctor? At any rate he
answered with a smile: "Then I surely must go, Clara, for you will get
fat and strong, as we both want to see you. Have you settled yet when
I must go?"

"Oh, you had better go tomorrow morning, doctor," Clara urged.

"She is right," the father assented; "the sun is shining and you must
not lose any more glorious days on the Alp."

The doctor had to laugh. "Why don't you chide me for being here still?
I shall go as quickly as I can, Sesemann."

Clara gave many messages to him for Heidi. She also told him to be
sure to observe everything closely, so that he would be able to tell
her all about it when he came back. The things for Heidi were to be
sent to him later, for Miss Rottenmeier, who had to pack them, was out
on one of her lengthy wanderings about town.

The doctor promised to comply with all Clara's wishes and to start the
following day.

Clara rang for the maid and said to her, when she arrived: "Please,
Tinette, pack a lot of fresh, soft coffee-cake in this box." A box
had been ready for this purpose many days. When the maid was leaving
the room she murmured: "That's a silly bother!"

Sebastian, who had happened to overhear some remarks, asked the
physician when he was leaving to take his regards to the little Miss,
as he called Heidi.

With a promise to deliver this message the doctor was just hastening
out, when he encountered an obstacle. Miss Rottenmeier, who had been
obliged to return from her walk on account of the strong wind, was
just coming in. She wore a large cape, which the wind was blowing
about her like two full sails. Both had retreated politely to give way
to each other. Suddenly the wind seemed to carry the housekeeper
straight towards the doctor, who had barely time to avoid her. This
little incident, which had ruffled Miss Rottenmeier's temper very
much, gave the doctor occasion to soothe her, as she liked to be
soothed by this man, whom she respected more than anybody in the
world. Telling her of his intended visit, he entreated her to pack the
things for Heidi as only she knew how.

Clara had expected some resistance from Miss Rottenmeier about the
packing of her presents. What was her surprise when this lady showed
herself most obliging, and immediately, on being told, brought
together all the articles! First came a heavy coat for Heidi, with a
hood, which Clara meant her to use on visits to the grandmother in the
winter. Then came a thick warm shawl and a large box with coffee-cake
for the grandmother. An enormous sausage for Peter's mother followed,
and a little sack of tobacco for the grandfather. At last a lot of
mysterious little parcels and boxes were packed, things that Clara had
gathered together for Heidi. When the tidy pack lay ready on the
ground, Clara's heart filled with pleasure at the thought of her
little friend's delight.

Sebastian now entered, and putting the pack on his shoulder, carried
it to the doctor's house without delay.




XVI

A GUEST ON THE ALP


The early dawn was tinging the mountains and a fresh morning-breeze
rocked the old fir-trees to and fro. Heidi opened her eyes, for the
rustling of the wind had awakened her. These sounds always thrilled
her heart, and now they drew her out of bed. Rising hurriedly, she
soon was neatly dressed and combed.

Coming down the little ladder and finding the grandfather's bed empty,
she ran outside. The old man was looking up at the sky to see what the
weather was going to be like that day. Rosy clouds were passing
overhead, but gradually the sky grew more blue and deep, and soon a
golden light passed over the heights, for the sun was rising in all
his glory.

"Oh, how lovely! Good-morning, grandfather," Heidi exclaimed.

"Are your eyes bright already?" the grandfather retorted, holding out
his hand.

Heidi then ran over to her beloved fir-trees and danced about, while
the wind was howling in the branches.

After the old man had washed and milked the goats, he brought them out
of the shed. When Heidi saw her friends again, she caressed them
tenderly, and they in their turn nearly crushed her between them.
Sometimes when Bärli got too wild, Heidi would say: "But Bärli, you
push me like the Big Turk," and that was enough to quiet the goat.

Soon Peter arrived with the whole herd, the jolly Thistlefinch ahead
of all the others. Heidi, being soon in the mist of them, was pushed
about among them. Peter was anxious to say a word to the little girl,
so he gave a shrill whistle, urging the goats to climb ahead. When he
was near her he said reproachfully: "You really might come with me
to-day!"

"No, I can't, Peter," said Heidi. "They might come from Frankfurt any
time. I must be home when they come."

"How often you have said that," grumbled the boy.

"But I mean it," replied Heidi. "Do you really think I want to be away
when they come from Frankfurt? Do you really think that, Peter?"

"They could come to uncle," Peter growled.

Then the grandfather's strong voice was heard: "Why doesn't the army
go forward? Is it the field-marshal's fault, or the fault of the
troop?"

Peter immediately turned about and led his goats up the mountain
without more ado.

Since Heidi had come home again to her grandfather she did many things
that had never occurred to her before. For instance, she would make
her bed every morning, and run about the hut, tidying and dusting.
With an old rag she would rub the chairs and table till they all
shone, and the grandfather would exclaim: "It is always Sunday with us
now; Heidi has not been away in vain."

On this day after breakfast, when Heidi began her self-imposed task,
it took her longer than usual, for the weather was too glorious to
stay within. Over and over again a bright sunbeam would tempt the busy
child outside. How could she stay indoors, when the glistening
sunshine was pouring down and all the mountains seemed to glow? She
had to sit down on the dry, hard ground and look down into the valley
and all about her. Then, suddenly remembering her little duties, she
would hasten back. It was not long, though, till the roaring fir-trees
tempted her again. The grandfather had been busy in his little shop,
merely glancing over at the child from time to time. Suddenly he heard
her call: "Oh grandfather, come!"

He was frightened and came out quickly He saw her running down the
hill crying: "They are coming, they are coming. Oh, the doctor is
coming first."

   [Illustration: THEY ARE COMING, OH, THE DOCTOR IS COMING FIRST]

When Heidi at last reached her old friend, he held out his hand, which
Heidi immediately seized. In the full joy of her heart, she exclaimed:
"How do you do, doctor? And I thank you a thousand times!"

"How are you, Heidi? But what are you thanking me for already?" the
doctor asked, with a smile.

"Because you let me come home again," the child explained.

The gentleman's face lit up like sunshine. He had certainly not
counted on such a reception on the Alp. On the contrary! Not even
noticing all the beauty around him, he had climbed up sadly, for he
was sure that Heidi probably would not know him any more. He thought
that he would be far from welcome, being obliged to cause her a great
disappointment. Instead, he beheld Heidi's bright eyes looking up at
him in gratefulness and love. She was still holding his arm, when he
said: "Come now, Heidi, and take me to your grandfather, for I want
to see where you live."

Like a kind father he had taken her hand, but Heidi stood still and
looked down the mountain-side.

"But where are Clara and grandmama?" she asked.

"Child, I must tell you something now which will grieve you as much as
it grieves me," replied the doctor. "I had to come alone, for Clara
has been very ill and could not travel. Of course grandmama has not
come either; but the spring will soon be here, and when the days get
long and warm, they will surely visit you."

Heidi was perfectly amazed; she could not understand how all those
things that she had pictured to herself so clearly would not happen
after all. She was standing perfectly motionless, confused by the
blow.

It was some time before Heidi remembered that, after all, she had come
down to meet the doctor. Looking up at her friend, she was struck by
his sad and cheerless face. How changed he was since she had seen
him! She did not like to see people unhappy, least of all the good,
kind doctor. He must be sad because Clara and grandmama had not come,
and to console him she said: "Oh, it won't last long till spring comes
again; then they will come for sure; they'll be able to stay much
longer then, and that will please Clara. Now we'll go to grandfather."

Hand in hand she climbed up with her old friend. All the way she tried
to cheer him up by telling him again and again of the coming summer
days. After they had reached the cottage, she called out to her
grandfather quite happily:

"They are not here yet, but it won't be very long before they are
coming!"

The grandfather warmly welcomed his guest, who did not seem at all a
stranger, for had not Heidi told him many things about the doctor?
They all three sat down on the bench before the door, and the doctor
told of the object of his visit. He whispered to the child that
something was coming up the mountain very soon which would bring her
more pleasure than his visit. What could it be?

The uncle advised the doctor to spend the splendid days of autumn on
the Alp, if possible, and to take a little room in the village instead
of in Ragatz; then he could easily walk up every day to the hut, and
from there the uncle could take him all around the mountains. This
plan was accepted.

The sun was in its zenith and the wind had ceased. Only a soft
delicious breeze fanned the cheeks of all.

The uncle now got up and went into the hut, returning soon with a
table and their dinner.

"Go in, Heidi, and set the table here. I hope you will excuse our
simple meal," he said, turning to his guest.

"I shall gladly accept this delightful invitation; I am sure that
dinner will taste good up here," said the guest, looking down over the
sun-bathed valley.

Heidi was running to and fro, for it gave her great joy to be able to
wait on her kind protector. Soon the uncle appeared with the steaming
milk, the toasted cheese, and the finely-sliced, rosy meat that had
been dried in the pure air. The doctor enjoyed his dinner better than
any he had ever tasted.

"Yes, we must send Clara up here. How she could gather strength!" he
said; "If she would have an appetite like mine to-day, she couldn't
help getting nice and fat."

At this moment a man could be seen walking up with a large sack on his
shoulders. Arriving on top, he threw down his load, breathing in the
pure, fresh air.

Opening the cover, the doctor said: "This has come for you from
Frankfurt, Heidi. Come and look what is in it."

Heidi timidly watched the heap, and only when the gentleman opened the
box with the cakes for the grandmother she said joyfully: "Oh, now
grandmother can eat this lovely cake." She was taking the box and the
beautiful shawl on her arm and was going to race down to deliver the
gifts, when the men persuaded her to stay and unpack the rest. What
was her delight at finding the tobacco and all the other things. The
men had been talking together, when the child suddenly planted herself
in front of them and said: "These things have not given me as much
pleasure as the dear doctor's coming." Both men smiled.

When it was near sunset, the doctor rose to start on his way down. The
grandfather, carrying the box, the shawl and the sausage, and the
guest holding the little girl by the hand, they wandered down the
mountain-side. When they reached Peter's hut, Heidi was told to go
inside and wait for her grandfather there. At parting she asked:
"Would you like to come with me up to the pasture to-morrow, doctor?"

"With pleasure. Good-bye, Heidi," was the reply. The grandfather had
deposited all the presents before the door, and it took Heidi long to
carry in the huge box and the sausage. The shawl she put on the
grandmother's knee.

Brigida had silently watched the proceedings, and could not open her
eyes wide enough when she saw the enormous sausage. Never in her life
had she seen the like, and now she really possessed it and could cut
it herself.

"Oh grandmother, don't the cakes please you awfully? Just look how
soft they are!" the child exclaimed. What was her amazement when she
saw the grandmother more pleased with the shawl, which would keep her
warm in winter.

"Grandmother, Clara has sent you that," Heidi said.

"Oh, what kind good people they are to think of a poor old woman like
me! I never thought I should ever own such a splendid wrap."

At this moment Peter came stumbling in.

"The uncle is coming up behind me, and Heidi must--" that was as far
as he got, for his eyes had fastened on the sausage. Heidi, however,
had already said good-bye, for she knew what he had meant. Though her
uncle never went by the hut any more without stepping in, she knew it
was too late to-day. "Heidi, come, you must get your sleep," he called
through the open door. Bidding them all good-night, he took Heidi by
the hand and under the glistening stars they wandered home to their
peaceful cottage.

[Illustration]




XVII

RETALIATION


Early the next morning the doctor climbed up the mountain in company
with Peter and his goats. The friendly gentleman made several attempts
to start a conversation with the boy, but as answer to his questions
he got nothing more than monosyllables. When they arrived on top, they
found Heidi already waiting, fresh and rosy as the early dawn.

"Are you coming?" asked Peter as usual.

"Of course I shall, if the doctor comes with us," replied the child.

The grandfather, coming out of the hut, greeted the newcomer with
great respect. Then he went up to Peter, and hung on his shoulder the
sack, which seemed to contain more than usual that day.

When they had started on their way, Heidi kept urging forward the
goats, which were crowding about her. When at last she was walking
peacefully by the doctor's side, she began to relate to him many
things about the goats and all their strange pranks, and about the
flowers, rocks and birds they saw. When they arrived at their
destination, time seemed to have flown. Peter all the time was sending
many an angry glance at the unconscious doctor, who never even noticed
it.

Heidi now took the doctor to her favorite spot. From there they could
hear the peaceful-sounding bells of the grazing cattle below. The sky
was deep blue, and above their heads the eagle was circling with
outstretched wings. Everything was luminous and bright about them, but
the doctor had been silent. Suddenly looking up, he beheld Heidi's
radiant eyes.

"Heidi, it is beautiful up here," he said. "But how can anybody with a
heavy heart enjoy the beauty? Tell me!"

"Oh," exclaimed Heidi, "one never has a sad heart here. One only gets
unhappy in Frankfurt."

A faint smile passed over the doctor's face. Then he began: "But if
somebody has brought his sorrow away with him, how would you comfort
him?"

"God in Heaven alone can help him."

"That is true, child," remarked the doctor. "But what can we do when
God Himself has sent us the affliction?"

After meditating a moment, Heidi replied: "One must wait patiently,
for God knows how to turn the saddest things to something happy in the
end. God will show us what He has meant to do for us. But He will only
do so if we pray to Him patiently."

"I hope you will always keep this beautiful belief, Heidi," said the
doctor. Then looking up at the mighty cliffs above, he continued:
"Think how sad it would make us not to be able to see all these
beautiful things. Wouldn't that make us doubly sad? Can you understand
me, child?"

A great pain shot through Heidi's breast. She had to think of the poor
grandmother. Her blindness was always a great sorrow to the child, and
she had been struck with it anew. Seriously she replied:

"Oh yes, I can understand it. But then we can read grandmother's
songs; they make us happy and bright again."

"Which songs, Heidi?"

"Oh, those of the sun, and of the beautiful garden, and then the last
verses of the long one. Grandmother loves them so that I always have
to read them over three times," said Heidi.

"I wish you would say them to me, child, for I should like to hear
them," said the doctor.

Heidi, folding her hands, began the consoling verses. She stopped
suddenly, however, for the doctor did not seem to listen. He was
sitting motionless, holding his hand before his eyes. Thinking that he
had fallen asleep, she remained silent. But the verses had recalled
his childhood days; he seemed to hear his mother and see her loving
eyes, for when he was a little boy she had sung this song to him. A
long time he sat there, till he discovered that Heidi was watching
him.

"Heidi, your song was lovely," he said with a more joyful voice. "We
must come here another day and then you can recite it to me again."

During all this time Peter had been boiling with anger. Now that Heidi
had come again to the pasture with him, she did nothing but talk to
the old gentleman. It made him very cross that he was not even able to
get near her. Standing a little distance behind Heidi's friend, he
shook his fist at him, and soon afterwards both fists, finally raising
them up to the sky, as Heidi and the doctor remained together.

When the sun stood in its zenith and Peter knew that it was noon, he
called over to them with all his might: "Time to eat."

When Heidi was getting up to fetch their dinner, the doctor just asked
for a glass of milk, which was all he wanted. The child also decided
to make the milk her sole repast, running over to Peter and informing
him of their resolution.

When the boy found that the whole contents of the bag was his, he
hurried with his task as never in his life before. But he felt guilty
on account of his former anger at the kind gentleman. To show his
repentance he held his hands up flat to the sky, indicating by his
action that his fists did not mean anything any more. Only after that
did he start with his feast.

Heidi and the doctor had wandered about the pasture till the gentleman
had found it time to go. He wanted Heidi to remain where she was, but
she insisted on accompanying him. All the way down she showed him many
places where the pretty mountain flowers grew, all of whose names she
could tell him. When they parted at last, Heidi waved to him. From
time to time he turned about, and seeing the child still standing
there, he had to think of his own little daughter who used to wave to
him like that when he went away from home.

The weather was warm and sunny that month. Every morning the doctor
came up to the Alp, spending his day very often with the old man. Many
a climb they had together that took them far up, to the bare cliffs
near the eagle's haunt. The uncle would show his guest all the herbs
that grew on hidden places and were strengthening and healing. He
could tell many strange things of the beasts that lived in holes in
rock or earth, or in the high tops of trees.

In the evening they would part, and the doctor would exclaim: "My dear
friend, I never leave you without having learned something."

But most of his days he spent with Heidi. Then the two would sit
together on the child's favorite spot, and Peter, quite subdued,
behind them. Heidi had to recite the verses, as she had done the first
day, and entertain him with all the things she knew.

At last the beautiful month of September was over. One morning the
doctor came up with a sadder face than usual. The time had come for
him to go back to Frankfurt, and great was the uncle's sadness at that
news. Heidi herself could hardly realize that her loving friend, whom
she had been seeing every day, was really leaving. The doctor himself
was loath to go, for the Alp had become as a home to him. But it was
necessary for him to go, and shaking hands with the grandfather, he
said good-bye, Heidi going along with him a little way.

Hand in hand they wandered down, till the doctor stood still. Then
caressing Heidi's curly hair, he said: "Now I must go, Heidi! I wish I
could take you along with me to Frankfurt; then I could keep you."

At those words, all the rows and rows of houses and streets, Miss
Rottenmeier and Tinette rose before Heidi's eyes. Hesitating a little,
she said: "I should like it better if you would come to see us again."

"I believe that will be better. Now farewell!" said the friendly
gentleman. When they shook hands his eyes filled with tears. Turning
quickly he hurried off.

Heidi, standing on the same spot, looked after him. What kind eyes he
had! But they had been full of tears. All of a sudden she began to cry
bitterly, and ran after her friend, calling with all her might, but
interrupted by her sobs:

"Oh doctor, doctor!"

Looking round he stood still and waited till the child had reached
him. Her tears came rolling down her cheeks while she sobbed: "I'll
come with you to Frankfurt and I'll stay as long as ever you want me
to. But first I must see grandfather."

"No, no, dear child," he said affectionately, "not at once. You must
remain here, I don't want you to get ill again. But if I should get
sick and lonely and ask you to come to me, would you come and stay
with me? Can I go away and think that somebody in this world still
cares for me and loves me?"

"Yes, I shall come to you the same day, for I really love you as much
as grandfather," Heidi assured him, crying all the time.

Shaking hands again, they parted. Heidi stayed on the same spot,
waving her hand and looking after her departing friend till he seemed
no bigger than a little dot. Then he looked back a last time at Heidi
and the sunny Alp, muttering to himself: "It is beautiful up there.
Body and soul get strengthened in that place and life seems worth
living again."

[Illustration]




XVIII

WINTER IN THE VILLAGE


The snow lay so deep around the Alm-hut that the windows seemed to
stand level with the ground and the house-door had entirely
disappeared. Round Peter's hut it was the same. When the boy went out
to shovel the snow, he had to creep through the window; then he would
sink deep into the soft snow and kick with arms and legs to get free.
Taking a broom, the boy would have to clear away the snow from the
door to prevent its falling into the hut.

The uncle had kept his word; when the first snow had fallen, he had
moved down to the village with Heidi and his goats. Near the church
and the parish house lay an old ruin that once had been a spacious
building. A brave soldier had lived there in days gone by; he had
fought in the Spanish war, and coming back with many riches, had
built himself a splendid house. But having lived too long in the noisy
world to be able to stand the monotonous life in the little town, he
soon went away, never to come back. After his death, many years later,
though the house was already beginning to decay, a distant relation of
his took possession of it. The new proprietor did not want to build it
up again, so poor people moved in. They had to pay little rent for the
house, which was gradually crumbling and falling to pieces. Years ago,
when the uncle had come to the village with Tobias, he had lived
there. Most of the time it had been empty, for the winter lasted long,
and cold winds would blow through the chinks in the walls. When poor
people lived there, their candles would be blown out and they would
shiver with cold in the dark. But the uncle, had known how to help
himself. In the fall, as soon as he had resolved to live in the
village, he came down frequently, fitting up the place as best he
could.

On approaching the house from the back, one entered an open room,
where nearly all the walls lay in ruins. On one side the remains of a
chapel could be seen, now covered with the thickest ivy. A large hall
came next, with a beautiful stone floor and grass growing in the
crevices. Most of the walls were gone and part of the ceiling also. If
a few thick pillars had not been left supporting the rest, it would
undoubtedly have tumbled down. The uncle had made a wooden partition
here for the goats, and covered the floor with straw. Several
corridors, most of them half decayed, led finally to a chamber with a
heavy iron door. This room was still in good condition and had dark
wood panelling on the four firm walls. In one corner was an enormous
stove, which nearly reached up to the ceiling. On the white tiles were
painted blue pictures of old towers surrounded by high trees, and of
hunters with their hounds. There also was a scene with a quiet lake,
where, under shady oak-trees, a fisherman was sitting. Around the
stove a bench was placed. Heidi loved to sit there, and as soon as she
had entered their new abode, she began to examine the pictures.
Arriving at the end of the bench, she discovered a bed, which was
placed between the wall and the stove. "Oh grandfather, I have found
my bed-room," exclaimed the little girl. "Oh, how fine it is! Where
are you going to sleep?"

"Your bed must be near the stove, to keep you warm," said the old man.
"Now come and look at mine."

With that the grandfather led her into his bed-room. From there a door
led into the hugest kitchen Heidi had ever seen. With a great deal of
trouble the grandfather had fitted up this place. Many boards were
nailed across the walls and the door had been fastened with heavy
wires, for beyond, the building lay in ruins. Thick underbrush was
growing there, sheltering thousands of insects and lizards. Heidi was
delighted with her new home, and when Peter arrived next day, she did
not rest till he had seen every nook and corner of the curious
dwelling-place.

Heidi slept very well in her chimney corner, but it took her many days
to get accustomed to it. When she woke up in the morning and could not
hear the fir-trees roar, she would wonder where she was. Was the snow
too heavy on the branches? Was she away from home? But as soon as she
heard her grandfather's voice outside, she remembered everything and
would jump merrily out of bed.

After four days had gone by, Heidi said to her grandfather: "I must go
to grandmother now, she has been alone so many days."

But the grandfather shook his head and said: "You can't go yet, child.
The snow is fathoms deep up there and is still falling. Peter can
hardly get through. A little girl like you would be snowed up and lost
in no time. Wait a while till it freezes and then you can walk on top
of the crust."

Heidi was very sorry, but she was so busy now that the days flew by.
Every morning and afternoon she went to school, eagerly learning
whatever was taught her. She hardly ever saw Peter there, for he did
not come very often. The mild teacher would only say from time to
time: "It seems to me, Peter is not here again! School would do him
good, but I guess there is too much snow for him to get through." But
when Heidi came home towards evening, Peter generally paid her a
visit.

After a few days the sun came out for a short time at noon, and the
next morning the whole Alp glistened and shone like crystal. When
Peter was jumping as usual into the snow that morning, he fell against
something hard, and before he could stop himself he flew a little way
down the mountain. When he had gained his feet at last, he stamped
upon the ground with all his might. It really was frozen as hard as
stone. Peter could hardly believe it, and quickly running up and
swallowing his milk, and putting his bread in his pocket, he
announced: "I must go to school to-day!"

"Yes, go and learn nicely," answered his mother.

Then, sitting down on his sled, the boy coasted down the mountain like
a shot. Not being able to stop his course when he reached the village,
he coasted down further and further, till he arrived in the plain,
where the sled stopped of itself. It was already late for school, so
the boy took his time and only arrived in the village when Heidi came
home for dinner.

"We've got it!" announced the boy, on entering.

"What, general?" asked the uncle.

"The snow," Peter replied.

"Oh, now I can go up to grandmother!" Heidi rejoiced. "But Peter, why
didn't you come to school? You could coast down to-day," she continued
reproachfully.

"I went too far on my sled and then it was too late," Peter replied.

"I call that deserting!" said the uncle. "People who do that must
have their ears pulled; do you hear?"

The boy was frightened, for there was no one in the world whom he
respected more than the uncle.

"A general like you ought to be doubly ashamed to do so," the uncle
went on. "What would you do with the goats if they did not obey you
any more?"

"Beat them," was the reply.

"If you knew of a boy that was behaving like a disobedient goat and
had to get spanked, what would you say?"

"Serves him right."

"So now you know it, goat-general: if you miss school again, when you
ought to be there, you can come to me and get your due."

Now at last Peter understood what the uncle had meant. More kindly,
the old man then turned to Peter and said, "Come to the table now and
eat with us. Then you can go up with Heidi, and when you bring her
back at night, you can get your supper here."

This unexpected change delighted Peter. Not losing any time, he soon
disposed of his full plate. Heidi, who had given the boy most of her
dinner, was already putting on Clara's new coat. Then together they
climbed up, Heidi chatting all the time. But Peter did not say a
single word. He was preoccupied and had not even listened to Heidi's
tales. Before they entered the hut, the boy said stubbornly: "I think
I had rather go to school than get a beating from the uncle." Heidi
promptly confirmed him in his resolution.

When they went into the room, Peter's mother was alone at the table
mending. The grandmother was nowhere to be seen. Brigida now told
Heidi that the grandmother was obliged to stay in bed on those cold
days, as she did not feel very strong. That was something new for
Heidi. Quickly running to the old woman's chamber, she found her lying
in a narrow bed, wrapped up in her grey shawl and thin blanket.

"Thank Heaven!" the grandmother exclaimed when she heard her
darling's step. All autumn and winter long a secret fear had been
gnawing at her heart, that Heidi would be sent for by the strange
gentleman of whom Peter had told her so much. Heidi had approached the
bed, asking anxiously: "Are you very sick, grandmother?"

"No, no, child," the old woman reassured her, "the frost has just gone
into my limbs a little."

"Are you going to be well again as soon as the warm weather comes?"
inquired Heidi.

"Yes, yes, and if God wills, even sooner. I want to go back to my
spinning-wheel and I nearly tried it to-day. I'll get up to-morrow,
though," the grandmother said confidently, for she had noticed how
frightened Heidi was.

The last speech made the child feel more happy. Then, looking
wonderingly at the grandmother, she said: "In Frankfurt people put on
a shawl when they go out. Why are you putting it on in bed,
grandmother?"

"I put it on to keep me warm, Heidi. I am glad to have it, for my
blanket is very thin."

"But, grandmother, your bed is slanting down at your head, where it
ought to be high. No bed ought to be like that."

"I know, child, I can feel it well." So saying, the old woman tried to
change her position on the pillow that lay under her like a thin
board. "My pillow never was very thick, and sleeping on it all these
years has made it flat."

"Oh dear, if I had only asked Clara to give me the bed I had in
Frankfurt!" Heidi lamented. "It had three big pillows on it; I could
hardly sleep because I kept sliding down from them all the time. Could
you sleep with them, grandmother?"

"Of course, because that would keep me warm. I could breathe so much
easier, too," said the grandmother, trying to find a higher place to
lie on. "But I must not talk about it any more, for I have to be
thankful for many things. I get the lovely roll every day and have
this beautiful warm shawl. I also have you, my child! Heidi, wouldn't
you like to read me something to-day?"

Heidi immediately fetched the book and read one song after another.
The grandmother in the meantime was lying with folded hands; her face,
which had been so sad a short time ago, was lit up with a happy smile.

Suddenly Heidi stopped.

"Are you well again, grandmother?" she asked.

"I feel very much better, Heidi. Please finish the song, will you?"

The child obeyed, and when she came to the last words,

    When mine eyes grow dim and sad,
      Let Thy love more brightly burn,
    That my soul, a wanderer glad,
      Safely homeward may return.

"Safely homeward may return!" she exclaimed: "Oh, grandmother, I know
what it is like to come home." After a while she said: "It is getting
dark, grandmother, I must go home now. I am glad that you feel
better again."

   [Illustration: THE TWO CHILDREN WERE ALREADY FLYING DOWN THE ALP]

The grandmother, holding the child's hand in hers, said: "Yes, I am
happy again, though I have to stay in bed. Nobody knows how hard it is
to lie here alone, day after day. I do not hear a word from anybody
and cannot see a ray of sunlight. I have very sad thoughts sometimes,
and often I feel as if I could not bear it any longer. But when I can
hear those blessed songs that you have read to me, it makes me feel as
if a light was shining into my heart, giving me the purest joy."

Shaking hands, the child now said good-night, and pulling Peter with
her, ran outside. The brilliant moon was shining down on the white
snow, light as day. The two children were already flying down the Alp,
like birds soaring through the air.

After Heidi had gone to bed that night, she lay awake a little while,
thinking over everything the grandmother had said, especially about
the joy the songs had given her. If only poor grandmother could hear
those comforting words every day! Heidi knew that it might be a week
or two again before she could repeat her visit. The child became very
sad when she thought how uncomfortable and lonely the old woman would
be. Was there no way for help? Suddenly Heidi had an idea, and it
thrilled her so that she felt as if she could not wait till morning
came to put her plan in execution. But in her excitement she had
forgotten her evening prayer, so sitting up in bed, she prayed
fervently to God. Then, falling back into the fragrant hay, she soon
slept peacefully and soundly still the bright morning came.

[Illustration]




XIX

WINTER STILL CONTINUES


Peter arrived punctually at school next day. He had brought his lunch
with him in a bag, for all the children that came from far away ate in
school, while the others went home. In the evening Peter as usual paid
his visit to Heidi.

The minute he opened the door she ran up to him, saying: "Peter, I
have to tell you something."

"Say it," he replied.

"You must learn to read now," said the child.

"I have done it already."

"Yes, yes, Peter, but I don't mean it that way," Heidi eagerly
proceeded; "you must learn so that you really know how afterwards."

"I can't," Peter remarked.

"Nobody believes you about that any more, and I won't either," Heidi
said resolutely. "When I was in Frankfurt, grandmama told me that it
wasn't true and that I shouldn't believe you."

Peter's astonishment was great.

"I'll teach you, for I know how; when you have learnt it, you must
read one or two songs to grandmother every day."

"I shan't!" grumbled the boy.

This obstinate refusal made Heidi very angry. With flaming eyes she
planted herself before the boy and said: "I'll tell you what will
happen, if you don't want to learn. Your mother has often said that
she'll send you to Frankfurt. Clara showed me the terrible, large
boys' school there, where you'll have to go. You must stay there till
you are a man, Peter! You mustn't think that there is only one teacher
there, and such a kind one as we have here. No, indeed! There are
whole rows of them, and when they are out walking they have high
black hats on their heads. I saw them myself, when I was out driving!"

Cold shivers ran down Peter's back.

"Yes, you'll have to go there, and when they find out that you can't
read or even spell, they'll laugh at you!"

"I'll do it," said Peter, half angry and half frightened.

"Oh, I am glad. Let us start right away!" said Heidi joyfully, pulling
Peter over to the table. Among the things that Clara had sent, Heidi
had found a little book with the A,B,C and some rhymes. She had chosen
this for the lessons. Peter, having to spell the first rhyme, found
great difficulty, so Heidi said, "I'll read it to you, and then you'll
be able to do it better. Listen:

    "If A, B, C you do not know,
    Before the school board you must go."

"I won't go," said Peter stubbornly.

"Where?"

"Before the court."

"Hurry up and learn the three letters, then you won't have to!"

Peter, beginning again, repeated the three letters till Heidi said:

"Now you know them."

Having observed the good result of the first rhyme, she began to read
again:

    D, E, F you then must read,
    Or of misfortune take good heed!

    If H,I,J,K are forgot,
    Adversity is on the spot

    Who over L and M doth stumble,
    Must pay a penance and feel humble.

    There's trouble coming; if you knew,
    You'd quickly learn N, O, P, Q.

    If still you halt on R, S, T,
    You'll suffer for it speedily.

Heidi, stopping, looked at Peter, who was so frightened by all these
threats and mysterious horrors that he sat as still as a mouse.
Heidi's tender heart was touched, and she said comfortingly: "Don't be
afraid, Peter; if you come to me every day, you'll soon learn all the
letters and then those things won't happen. But come every day, even
when it snows. Promise!"

Peter did so, and departed. Obeying Heidi's instructions, he came
daily to her for his lesson.

Sometimes the grandfather would sit in the room, smoking his pipe;
often the corners of his mouth would twitch as if he could hardly keep
from laughing.

He generally invited Peter to stay to supper afterwards, which
liberally rewarded the boy for all his great exertions.

Thus the days passed by. In all this time Peter had really made some
progress, though the rhymes still gave him difficulty.

When they had come to U, Heidi read:

    Whoever mixes U and V,
    Will go where he won't want to be!

and further,

    If W you still ignore,
    Look at the rod beside the door.

Often Peter would growl and object to those measures, but nevertheless
he kept on learning, and soon had but three letters left.

The next few days the following rhymes, with their threats, made Peter
more eager than ever.

      If you the letter X forget
      For you no supper will be set.

    If you still hesitate with Y,
    For shame you'll run away and cry.

When Heidi read the last,

    And he who makes his Z with blots,
    Must journey to the Hottentots,

Peter sneered: "Nobody even knows where they are!"

"I am sure grandfather does," Heidi retorted, jumping up. "Just wait
one minute and I shall ask him. He is over with the parson," and with
that she had opened the door.

"Wait!" shrieked Peter in great alarm, for he saw himself already
transported to those dreadful people. "What is the matter with you?"
said Heidi, standing still.

"Nothing, but stay here. I'll learn," he blubbered. But Heidi,
wanting to know something about the Hottentots herself, could only be
kept back by piteous screams from Peter. So at last they settled down
again, and before it was time to go, Peter knew the last letter, and
had even begun to read syllables. From this day on he progressed more
quickly.

It was three weeks since Heidi had paid her last visit to the
grandmother, for much snow had fallen since. One evening, Peter,
coming home, said triumphantly:

"I can do it!"

"What is it you can do, Peter?" asked his mother, eagerly.

"Read."

"What, is it possible? Did you hear it, grandmother?" exclaimed
Brigida.

The grandmother also was curious to learn how this had happened.

"I must read a song now; Heidi told me to," Peter continued. To the
women's amazement, Peter began. After every verse his mother would
exclaim, "Who would have ever thought it!" while the grandmother
remained silent.

One day later, when it happened that it was Peter's turn to read in
school, the teacher said:

"Peter, must I pass you by again, as usual? Or do you want to try--I
shall not say to read, but to stammer through a line?"

Peter began and read three lines without stopping.

In dumb astonishment, the teacher, putting down his book, looked at
the boy.

"What miracle has happened to you?" he exclaimed. "For a long time I
tried to teach you with all my patience, and you were not even able to
grasp the letters, but now that I had given you up as hopeless, you
have not only learnt how to spell, but even to read. How did this
happen, Peter?"

"It was Heidi," the boy replied.

In great amazement, the teacher looked at the little girl. Then the
kind man continued:

"I have noticed a great change in you, Peter. You used to stay away
from school, sometimes more than a week, and lately you have not even
missed a day. Who has brought about this change?"

"The uncle."

Every evening now Peter on his return home read one song to his
grandmother, but never more. To the frequent praises of Brigida, the
old woman once replied: "I am glad he has learnt something, but
nevertheless I am longing for the spring to come. Then Heidi can visit
me, for when she reads, the verses sound so different. I cannot always
follow Peter, and the songs don't thrill me the way they do when Heidi
says them!"

And no wonder! For Peter would often leave out long and difficult
words,--what did three or four words matter! So it happened sometimes
that there were hardly any nouns left in the hymns that Peter read.




XX

NEWS FROM DISTANT FRIENDS


May had come. Warm sunshine was bathing the whole Alp in glorious
light, and having melted the last snow, had brought the first spring
flowers to the surface. A merry spring wind was blowing, drying up the
damp places in the shadow. High above in the azure heaven the eagle
floated peacefully.

Heidi and her grandfather were back on the Alp. The child was so happy
to be home again that she jumped about among the beloved objects. Here
she discovered a new spring bud, and there she watched the gay little
gnats and beetles that were swarming in the sun.

The grandfather was busy in his little shop, and a sound of hammering
and sawing could be heard. Heidi had to go and see what the
grandfather was making. There before the door stood a neat new chair,
while the old man was busy making a second.

"Oh, I know what they are for," said Heidi gaily. "You are making them
for Clara and grandmama. Oh, but we need a third--or do you think that
Miss Rottenmeier won't come, perhaps?"

"I really don't know," said grandfather: "but it is safer to have a
chair for her, if she should come."

Heidi, thoughtfully looking at the backless chairs, remarked:
"Grandfather, I don't think she would sit down on those."

"Then we must invite her to sit down on the beautiful green lounge of
grass," quietly answered the old man.

While Heidi was still wondering what the grandfather had meant, Peter
arrived, whistling and calling. As usual, Heidi was soon surrounded by
the goats, who also seemed happy to be back on the Alp. Peter, angrily
pushing the goats aside, marched up to Heidi, thrusting a letter into
her hand.

"Did you get a letter for me on the pasture?" Heidi said, astonished.

"No."

"Where did it come from?"

"From my bag."

The letter had been given to Peter the previous evening; putting it in
his lunch-bag, the boy had forgotten it there till he opened the bag
for his dinner. Heidi immediately recognized Clara's handwriting, and
bounding over to her grandfather, exclaimed: "A letter has come from
Clara. Wouldn't you like me to read it to you, grandfather?"

Heidi immediately read to her two listeners, as follows:--

    DEAR HEIDI:--

    We are all packed up and shall travel in two or three days. Papa
    is leaving, too, but not with us, for he has to go to Paris
    first. The dear doctor visits us now every day, and as soon as
    he opens the door, he calls, 'Away to the Alp!' for he can
    hardly wait for us to go. If you only knew how he enjoyed being
    with you last fall! He came nearly every day this winter to tell
    us all about you and the grandfather and the mountains and the
    flowers he saw. He said that it was so quiet in the pure,
    delicious air, away from towns and streets, that everybody has
    to get well there. He is much better himself since his visit,
    and seems younger and happier. Oh, how I look forward to it all!
    The doctor's advice is, that I shall go to Ragatz first for
    about six weeks, then I can go to live in the village, and from
    there I shall come to see you every fine day. Grandmama, who is
    coming with me, is looking forward to the trip too. But just
    think, Miss Rottenmeier does not want to go. When grandmama
    urges her, she always declines politely. I think Sebastian must
    have given her such a terrible description of the high rocks and
    fearful abysses, that she is afraid. I think he told her that it
    was not safe for anybody, and that only goats could climb such
    dreadful heights. She used to be so eager to go to Switzerland,
    but now neither Tinette nor she wants to take the risk. I can
    hardly wait to see you again!

    Good-bye, dear Heidi, with much love from grandmama,

                    I am your true friend,
                              CLARA.



When Peter heard this, he swung his rod to right and left. Furiously
driving the goats before him, he bounded down the hill.

Heidi visited the grandmother next day, for she had to tell her the
good news. Sitting up in her corner, the old woman was spinning as
usual. Her face looked sad, for Peter had already announced the near
visit of Heidi's friends, and she dreaded the result.

After having poured out her full heart, Heidi looked at the old woman.
"What is it, grandmother?" said the child. "Are you not glad?"

"Oh yes, Heidi, I am glad, because you are happy."

"But, grandmother, you seem so anxious. Do you still think Miss
Rottenmeier is coming?"

"Oh no, it is nothing. Give me your hand, for I want to be sure that
you are still here. I suppose it will be for the best, even if I shall
not live to see the day!"

"Oh, but then I would not care about this coming," said the child.

The grandmother had hardly slept all night for thinking of Clara's
coming. Would they take Heidi away from her, now that she was well and
strong? But for the sake of the child she resolved to be brave.

"Heidi," she said, "please read me the song that begins with 'God will
see to it.'"

Heidi immediately did as she was told; she knew nearly all the
grandmother's favorite hymns by now and always found them quickly.

"That does me good, child," the old woman said. Already the expression
of her face seemed happier and less troubled. "Please read it a few
times over, child," she entreated.

Thus evening came, and when Heidi wandered homewards, one twinkling
star after another appeared in the sky. Heidi stood still every few
minutes, looking up to the firmament in wonder. When she arrived home,
her grandfather also was looking up to the stars, murmuring to
himself: "What a wonderful month!--one day clearer than the other.
The herbs will be fine and strong this year."

The blossom month had passed, and June, with the long, long days, had
come. Quantities of flowers were blooming everywhere, filling the air
with perfume. The month was nearing its end, when one morning Heidi
came running out of the hut, where she had already completed her
duties. Suddenly she screamed so loud that the grandfather hurriedly
came out to see what had happened.

"Grandfather! Come here! Look, look!"

A strange procession was winding up the Alm. First marched two men,
carrying an open sedan chair with a young girl in it, wrapped up in
many shawls. Then came a stately lady on horseback, who, talking with
a young guide beside her, looked eagerly right and left. Then an empty
rolling-chair, carried by a young fellow, was followed by a porter who
had so many covers, shawls and furs piled up on his basket that they
towered high above his head.

"They are coming! they are coming!" cried Heidi in her joy, and soon
the party had arrived at the top. Great was the happiness of the
children at seeing each other again. When grandmama had descended from
her horse, she tenderly greeted Heidi first, and then turned to the
uncle, who had approached the group. The two met like two old friends,
they had heard so much about each other.

After the first words were exchanged, the grandmother exclaimed: "My
dear uncle, what a wonderful residence you have. Who would have ever
thought it! Kings could envy you here! Oh, how well my Heidi is
looking, just like a little rose!" she continued, drawing the child
closely to her side and patting her cheeks. "What glory everywhere!
Clara, what do you say to it all?"

Clara, looking about her rapturously, cried: "Oh, how wonderful, how
glorious! I have never dreamt it could be as beautiful as that. Oh
grandmama, I wish I could stay here!"

The uncle had busied himself in the meantime with getting Clara's
rolling-chair for her. Then, going up to the girl, he gently lifted
her into her seat. Putting some covers over her knees, he tucked her
feet in warmly. It seemed as if the grandfather had done nothing else
all his life than nurse lame people.

"My dear uncle," said the grandmama, surprised, "please tell me where
you learned that, for I shall send all the nurses I know here
immediately."

The uncle smiled faintly, while he replied: "It comes more from care
than study."

His face became sad. Before his eyes had risen bygone times. For that
was the way he used to care for his poor wounded captain, whom he had
found in Sicily after a violent battle. He alone had been allowed to
nurse him till his death, and now he would take just as good care of
poor, lame Clara.

When Clara had looked a long time at the cloudless sky above and all
the rocky crags, she said longingly: "I wish I could walk round the
hut to the fir-trees. If I only could see all the things you told me
so much about!"

Heidi pushed with all her might, and behold! the chair rolled easily
over the dry grass. When they had come into the little grove, Clara
could not see her fill of those splendid trees that must have stood
there so many, many years. Although the people had changed and
vanished, they had remained the same, ever looking down into the
valley.

When they passed the empty goat-shed, Clara said pitifully: "Oh
grandmama, if I could only wait up here for Schwänli and Bärli! I am
afraid I shan't see Peter and his goats, if we have to go away so soon
again."

"Dear child, enjoy now what you can," said the grandmama, who had
followed.

"Oh, what wonderful flowers!" exclaimed Clara again; "whole bushes of
exquisite, red blossoms. Oh, if I could only pick some of those
bluebells!"

Heidi, immediately gathering a large bunch, put them in Clara's lap.

"Clara, this is really nothing in comparison with the many flowers in
the pasture. You must come up once and see them. There are so many
that the ground seems golden with them. If you ever sit down among
them, you will feel as if you could never get up any more, it is so
beautiful."

"Oh, grandmama, do you think I can ever go up there?" Clara asked with
a wild longing in her eyes. "If I could only walk with you, Heidi, and
climb round everywhere!"

"I'll push you!" Heidi said for comfort. To show how easy it was, she
pushed the chair at such a rate that it would have tumbled down the
mountain, if the grandfather had not stopped it at the last moment.

It was time for dinner now. The table was spread near the bench, and
soon everybody sat down. The grandmother was so overcome by the view
and the delicious wind that fanned her cheek that she remarked: "What
a wondrous place this is! I have never seen its like! But what do I
see?" she continued. "I think you are actually eating your second
piece of cheese, Clara?"

"Oh grandmama, it tastes better than all the things we get in Ragatz,"
replied the child, eagerly eating the savory dish.

"Don't stop, our mountain wind helps along where the cooking is
faulty!" contentedly said the old man.

During the meal the uncle and the grandmama had soon got into a lively
conversation. They seemed to agree on many things, and understood each
other like old friends. A little later the grandmama looked over to
the west.

"We must soon start, Clara, for the sun is already low; our guides
will be here shortly."

Clara's face had become sad, and she entreated: "Oh, please let us
stay here another hour or so. We haven't even seen the hut yet. I wish
the day were twice as long."

The grandmama assented to Clara's wish to go inside. When the
rolling-chair was found too broad for the door, the uncle quietly
lifted Clara in his strong arms and carried her in. Grandmama was
eagerly looking about her, glad to see everything so neat. Then going
up the little ladder to the hay-loft, she discovered Heidi's bed. "Is
that your bed, Heidi? What a delicious perfume! It must be a healthy
place to sleep," she said, looking out through the window. The
grandfather, with Clara, was coming up, too, with Heidi following.

Clara was perfectly entranced. "What a lovely place to sleep! Oh,
Heidi, you can look right up to the sky from your bed. What a good
smell! You can hear the fir-trees roar here, can't you? Oh, I never
saw a more delightful bed-room!"

The uncle, looking at the old lady, said now: "I have an idea that it
would give Clara new strength to stay up here with us a little while.
Of course, I only mean if you did not object. You have brought so many
wraps that we can easily make a soft bed for Clara here. My dear lady,
you can easily leave the care to me. I'll undertake it gladly."

The children screamed for joy, and grandmama's face was beaming.

"What a fine man you are!" she burst out. "I was just thinking myself
that a stay here would strengthen the child, but then I thought of the
care and trouble for you. And now you have offered to do it, as if it
was nothing at all. How can I thank you enough, uncle?"

After shaking hands many times, the two prepared Clara's bed, which,
thanks to the old lady's precautions, was soon so soft that the hay
could not be felt through at all.

The uncle had carried his new patient back to her rolling-chair, and
there they found her sitting, with Heidi beside her. They were eagerly
talking of their plans for the coming weeks. When they were told that
Clara might stay for a month or so, their faces beamed more than ever.

The guide, with the horse, and the carriers of the chair, now
appeared, but the last two were not needed any more and could be sent
away.

When the grandmother got ready to leave, Clara called gaily to her:
"Oh grandmama, it won't be long, for you must often come and see us."

While the uncle was leading the horse down the steep incline, the
grandmama told him that she would go back to Ragatz, for the Dörfli
was too lonely for her. She also promised to come back from time to
time.

Before the grandfather had returned, Peter came racing down to the hut
with all his goats. Seeing Heidi, they ran up to her in haste, and so
Clara made the acquaintance of Schwänli and Bärli and all the others.

Peter, however, kept away, only sending furious looks at the two
girls. When they bade him good-night, he only ran away, beating the
air with his stick.

The end of the joyous day had come. The two children were both lying
in their beds.

"Oh, Heidi!" Clara exclaimed, "I can see so many glittering stars, and
I feel as if we were driving in a high carriage straight into the
sky."

"Yes, and do you know why the stars twinkle so merrily?" inquired
Heidi.

"No, but tell me."

"Because they know that God in heaven looks after us mortals and we
never need to fear. See, they twinkle and show us how to be merry,
too. But Clara, we must not forget to pray to God and ask Him to think
of us and keep us safe."

Sitting up in bed, they then said their evening prayer. As soon as
Heidi lay down, she fell asleep. But Clara could not sleep quite yet,
it was too wonderful to see the stars from her bed.

In truth she had never seen them before, because in Frankfurt all the
blinds were always down long before the stars came out, and at night
she had never been outside the house. She could hardly keep her eyes
shut, and had to open them again and again to watch the twinkling,
glistening stars, till her eyes closed at last and she saw two big,
glittering stars in her dream.




XXI

OF FURTHER EVENTS ON THE ALP


The sun was just rising, and the Alm-Uncle was watching how mountain
and dale awoke to the new day, and the clouds above grew brighter.

Next, the old man turned to go back into the hut, and softly climbed
the ladder. Clara, having just a moment ago opened her eyes, looked
about her in amazement. Bright sunbeams danced on her bed. Where was
she? But soon she discovered her sleeping friend, and heard the
grandfather's cheery voice:

"How did you sleep? Not tired?"

Clara, feeling fresh and rested, said that she had never slept better
in all her life. Heidi was soon awake, too, and lost no time in coming
down to join Clara, who was already sitting in the sun.

A cool morning breeze fanned their cheeks, and the spicy fragrance
from the fir-trees filled their lungs with every breath. Clara had
never experienced such well-being in all her life. She had never
breathed such pure, cool morning air and never felt such warm,
delicious sunshine on her feet and hands. It surpassed all her
expectations.

"Oh, Heidi, I wish I could always stay up here with you!" she said.

"Now you can see that everything is as beautiful as I told you," Heidi
replied triumphantly. "Up on the Alp with grandfather is the loveliest
spot in all the world."

The grandfather was just coming out of the shed with two full bowls of
steaming, snow-white milk. Handing one to each of the children, he
said to Clara: "This will do you good, little girl. It comes from
Schwänli and will give you strength. To your health! Just drink it!"
he said encouragingly, for Clara had hesitated a little. But when she
saw that Heidi's bowl was nearly empty already, she also drank
without even stopping. Oh, how good it was! It tasted like cinnamon
and sugar.

"We'll take two tomorrow," said the grandfather.

After their breakfast, Peter arrived. While the goats were rushing up
to Heidi, bleating loudly, the grandfather took the boy aside.

"Just listen, and do what I tell you," he said. "From now on you must
let Schwänli go wherever she likes. She knows where to get the richest
herbs, and you must follow her, even if she should go higher up than
usual. It won't do you any harm to climb a little more, and will do
all the others good. I want the goats to give me splendid milk,
remember. What are you looking at so furiously?"

Peter was silent, and without more ado started off, still angrily
looking back now and then. As Heidi had followed a little way, Peter
called to her: "You must come along, Heidi, Schwänli has to be
followed everywhere."

"No, but I can't," Heidi called back: "I won't be able to come as
long as Clara is with me. Grandfather has promised, though, to let us
come up with you once."

With those words Heidi returned to Clara, while the goatherd was
hurrying onward, angrily shaking his fists.

The children had promised to write a letter to grandmama every day, so
they immediately started on their task. Heidi brought out her own
little three-legged stool, her school-books and her papers, and with
these on Clara's lap they began to write. Clara stopped after nearly
every sentence, for she had to look around. Oh, how peaceful it was
with the little gnats dancing in the sun and the rustling of the
trees! From time to time they could hear the shouting of a shepherd
re-echoed from many rocks.

The morning had passed, they knew not how, and dinner was ready. They
again ate outside, for Clara had to be in the open air all day, if
possible. The afternoon was spent in the cool shadow of the fir-trees.
Clara had many things to relate of Frankfurt and all the people that
Heidi knew. It was not long before Peter arrived with his flock, but
without even answering the girls' friendly greeting, he disappeared
with a grim scowl.

While Schwänli was being milked in the shed, Clara said:

"Oh, Heidi, I feel as if I could not wait for my milk. Isn't it funny?
All my life I have only eaten because I had to. Everything always
tasted to me like cod-liver oil, and I have often wished that I should
never have to eat. And now I am so hungry!"

"Oh yes, I know," Heidi replied. She had to think of the days in
Frankfurt when her food seemed to stick in her throat.

When at last the full bowls were brought by the old man, Clara,
seizing hers, eagerly drank the contents in one draught and even
finished before Heidi.

"Please, may I have a little more?" she asked, holding out the bowl.

Nodding, much pleased, the grandfather soon refilled it. This time he
also brought with him a slice of bread and butter for the children.
He had gone to Maiensass that afternoon to get the butter, and his
trouble was well rewarded: they enjoyed it as if it had been the
rarest dish.

This evening Clara fell asleep the moment she lay down. Two or three
days passed in this pleasant way. The next brought a surprise. Two
strong porters came up the Alp, each carrying on his back a fresh,
white bed. They also brought a letter from grandmama, in which she
thanked the children for their faithful writing, and told them that
the beds were meant for them. When they went to sleep that night, they
found their new beds in exactly the same position as their former ones
had been.

Clara's rapture in her new life grew greater every day, and she could
not write enough of the grandfather's kindly care and of Heidi's
entertaining stories. She told her grandmama that her first thought in
the morning always was: "Thank God, I am still in the Alm-hut."

Grandmama was highly pleased at those reports, and put her projected
visit off a little while, for she had found the ride pretty tiring.

The grandfather took excellent care of his little patient, and no day
passed on which he did not climb around to find the most savory herbs
for Schwänli. The little goat thrived so that everybody could see it
in the way her eyes were flashing.

It was the third week of Clara's stay. Every morning after the
grandfather had carried her down, he said to her: "Would my Clara try
to stand a little?" Clara always sighed, "Oh, it hurts me so!" but
though she would cling to him, he made her stand a little longer every
day.

This summer was the finest that had been for years. Day after day the
sun shone on a cloudless sky, and at night it would pour its purple,
rosy light down on the rocks and snow-fields till everything seemed to
glow like fire.

Heidi had told Clara over and over again of all the flowers on the
pasture, of the masses of golden roses and the blue-flowers that
covered the ground. She had just been telling it again, when a longing
seized her, and jumping up she ran over to her grandfather, who was
busy carving in the shop.

"Oh, grandfather," she cried from afar, "won't you come with us to the
pasture tomorrow? Oh, it's so beautiful up there now."

"All right, I will," he replied; "but tell Clara that she must do
something to please me; she must try to stand longer this evening for
me."

Heidi merrily came running with her message. Of course, Clara
promised, for was it not her greatest wish to go up with Heidi to the
pasture! When Peter returned this evening, he heard of the plan for
the morrow. But for answer Peter only growled, nearly hitting poor
Thistlefinch in his anger.

The children had just resolved to stay awake all night to talk about
the coming day, when their conversation suddenly ceased and they were
both peacefully slumbering. In her dreams Clara saw before her a field
that was thickly strewn with light-blue flowers, while Heidi heard the
eagle scream to her from above, "Come, come, come!"




XXII

SOMETHING UNEXPECTED HAPPENS


The next day dawned cloudless and fair. The grandfather was still with
the children, when Peter came climbing up; his goats kept at a good
distance from him, to evade the rod, which was striking right and
left. The truth was that the boy was terribly embittered and angry by
the changes that had come. When he passed the hut in the morning,
Heidi was always busy with the strange child, and in the evening it
was the same. All summer long Heidi had not been up with him a single
time; it was too much! And to-day she was coming at last, but again in
company with this hateful stranger.

   [Illustration: HE WATCHED HIS FALLEN ENEMY TUMBLING DOWNWARDS,
   DOWNWARDS]

It was then that Peter noticed the rolling-chair standing near the
hut. After carefully glancing about him, he rushed at the hated
object and pushed it down the incline. The chair fairly flew away and
had soon disappeared.

Peter's conscience smote him now, and he raced up the Alp, not daring
to pause till he had reached a blackberry bush. There he could hide,
when the uncle might appear. Looking down, he watched his fallen enemy
tumbling downwards, downwards.

Sometimes it was thrown high up into the air, to crash down again the
next moment harder than ever. Pieces were falling from it right and
left, and were blown about. Now the stranger would have to travel home
and Heidi would be his again! But Peter had forgotten that a bad deed
always brings a punishment.

Heidi just now came out of the hut. The grandfather, with Clara,
followed. Heidi at first stood still, and then, running right and
left, she returned to the old man.

"What does this mean? Have you rolled the chair away Heidi?" he
asked.

"I am just looking for it everywhere, grandfather. You said it was
beside the shop door," said the child, still hunting for the missing
object. A strong wind was blowing, which at this moment violently
closed the shop-door.

"Grandfather, the wind has done it," exclaimed Heidi eagerly. "Oh
dear! if it has rolled all the way down to the village, it will be too
late to go to-day. It will take us a long time to fetch it."

"If it has rolled down there, we shall never get it any more, for it
will be smashed to pieces," said the old man, looking down and
measuring the distance from the corner of the hut.

"I don't see how it happened," he remarked.

"What a shame! now I'll never be able to go up to the pasture,"
lamented Clara. "I am afraid I'll have to go home now. What a pity,
what a pity!"

"You can find a way for her to stay, grandfather, can't you?"

"We'll go up to the pasture to-day, as we have planned. Then we shall
see what further happens."

The children were delighted, and the grandfather lost no time in
getting ready. First he fetched a pile of covers, and seating Clara on
a sunny spot on the dry ground, he got their breakfast.

"I wonder why Peter is so late to-day," he said, leading his goats out
of the shed. Then, lifting Clara up on one strong arm, he carried the
covers on the other.

"Now, march!" he cried. "The goats come with us."

That suited Heidi, and with one arm round Schwänli and the other round
Bärli, she wandered up. Her little companions were so pleased at
having her with them again that they nearly crushed her with
affection.

What was their astonishment when, arriving on top, they saw Peter
already lying on the ground, with his peaceful flock about him.

"What did you mean by going by us like that? I'll teach you!" called
the uncle to him.

Peter was frightened, for he knew the voice.

"Nobody was up yet," the boy retorted.

"Have you seen the chair?" asked the uncle again.

"Which?" Peter growled.

The uncle said no more. Unfolding the covers, he put Clara down on the
dry grass. Then, when he had been assured of Clara's comfort, he got
ready to go home. The three were to stay there till his return in the
evening. When dinner time had come, Heidi was to prepare the meal and
see that Clara got Schwänli's milk.

The sky was a deep blue, and the snow on the peaks was glistening. The
eagle was floating above the rocky crags. The children felt
wonderfully happy. Now and then one of the goats would come and lie
down near them. Tender little Snowhopper came oftener than any and
would rub her head against their shoulders.

They had been sitting quietly for a few hours, drinking in the beauty
about them, when Heidi suddenly began to long for the spot where so
many flowers grew. In the evening it would be too late to see them,
for they always shut their little eyes by then.

"Oh, Clara," she said hesitatingly, "would you be angry if I went away
from you a minute and left you alone? I want to see the flowers; But
wait!--" Jumping away, she brought Clara some bunches of fragrant
herbs and put them in her lap. Soon after she returned with little
Snowhopper.

"So, now you don't need to be alone," said Heidi. When Clara had
assured her that it would give her pleasure to be left alone with the
goats, Heidi started on her walk. Clara slowly handed one leaf after
another to the little creature; it became more and more confiding, and
cuddling close to the child, ate the herbs out of her hand. It was
easy to see how happy it was to be away from the boisterous big goats,
which often annoyed it. Clara felt a sensation of contentment such as
she had never before experienced. She loved to sit there on the
mountain-side with the confiding little goat by her. A great desire
rose in her heart that hour. She longed to be her own master and be
able to help others instead of being helped by them. Many other
thoughts and ideas rushed through her mind. How would it be to live up
here in continual sunshine? The world seemed so joyous and wonderful
all of a sudden. Premonitions of future undreamt-of happiness made her
heart beat. Suddenly she threw both arms about the little goat and
said: "Oh, little Snowhopper how beautiful it is up here! If I could
always stay with you!"

Heidi in the meantime had reached the spot, where, as she had
expected, the whole ground was covered with yellow rock-roses. Near
together in patches the bluebells were nodding gently in the breeze.
But all the perfume that filled the air came from the modest little
brown flowers that hid their heads between the golden flower-cups.
Heidi stood enraptured, drawing in the perfumed air.

Suddenly she turned and ran back to Clara, shouting to her from far:
"Oh, you must come, Clara, it is so lovely there. In the evening it
won't be so fine any more. Don't you think I could carry you?"

"But Heidi," Clara said, "of course you can't; you are much smaller
than I am. Oh, I wish I could walk!"

Heidi meditated a little. Peter was still lying on the ground. He had
been staring down for hours, unable to believe what he saw before him.
He had destroyed the chair to get rid of the stranger, and there she
was again, sitting right beside his playmate.

Heidi now called to him to come down, but as reply he only grumbled:
"Shan't come."

"But you must; come quickly, for I want you to help me. Quickly!"
urged the child.

"Don't want to," sounded the reply.

Heidi hurried up the mountain now and shouted angrily to the boy:
"Peter, if you don't come this minute, I shall do something that you
won't like."

Those words scared Peter, for his conscience was not clear. His deed
had rejoiced him till this moment, when Heidi seemed to talk as if she
knew it all. What if the grandfather should hear about it! Trembling
with fear, Peter obeyed.

"I shall only come if you promise not to do what you said," insisted
the boy.

"No, no, I won't. Don't be afraid," said Heidi compassionately: "Just
come along; it isn't so hard."

Peter, on approaching Clara, was told to help raise the lame child
from the ground on one side, while Heidi helped on the other. This
went easily enough, but difficulties soon followed. Clara was not able
to stand alone, and how could they get any further?

"You must take me round the neck," said Heidi, who had seen what poor
guides they made.

The boy, who had never offered his arm to anybody in his life, had to
be shown how first, before further efforts could be made. But it was
too hard. Clara tried to set her feet forward, but got discouraged.

"Press your feet on the ground more and I am sure it will hurt you
less," suggested Heidi.

"Do you think so?" said Clara, timidly.

But, obeying, she ventured a firmer step and soon another, uttering a
little cry as she went.

"Oh, it really has hurt me less," she said joyfully.

"Try it again," Heidi urged her. Clara did, and took another step, and
then another, and another still. Suddenly she cried aloud: "Oh, Heidi,
I can do it. Oh, I really can. Just look! I can take steps, one after
another."

Heidi rapturously exclaimed: "Oh, Clara, can you really? Can you walk?
Oh, can you take steps now? Oh, if only grandfather would come! Now
you can walk, Clara, now you can walk," she kept on saying joyfully.

Clara held on tight to the children, but with every new step she
became more firm.

"Now you can come up here every day," cried Heidi. "Now we can walk
wherever we want to and you don't have to be pushed in a chair any
more. Now you'll be able to walk all your life. Oh, what joy!"

Clara's greatest wish, to be able to be well like other people, had
been fulfilled at last. It was not very far to the flowering field.
Soon they reached it and sat down among the wealth of bloom. It was
the first time that Clara had ever rested on the dry, warm earth. All
about them the flowers nodded and exhaled their perfume. It was a
scene of exquisite beauty.

The two children could hardly grasp this happiness that had come to
them. It filled their hearts brimming full and made them silent. Peter
also lay motionless, for he had gone to sleep.

Thus the hours flew, and the day was long past noon. Suddenly all the
goats arrived, for they had been seeking the children. They did not
like to graze in the flowers, and were glad when Peter awoke with
their loud bleating. The poor boy was mightily bewildered, for he had
dreamt that the rolling-chair with the red cushions stood again before
his eyes. On awaking, he had still seen the golden nails; but soon he
discovered that they were nothing but flowers. Remembering his deed,
he obeyed Heidi's instructions willingly.

When they came back to their former place, Heidi lost no time in
setting out the dinner. The bag was very full to-day, and Heidi
hurried to fulfill her promise to Peter, who with bad conscience had
understood her threat differently. She made three heaps of the good
things, and when Clara and she were through, there was still a lot
left for the boy. It was too bad that all this treat did not give him
the usual satisfaction, for something seemed to stick in his throat.

Soon after their belated dinner, the grandfather was seen climbing up
the Alp. Heidi ran to meet him, confusedly telling him of the great
event. The old man's face shone at this news. Going over to Clara, he
said: "So you have risked it? Now we have won."

Then picking her up, he put one arm around her waist, and the other
one he stretched out as support, and with his help she marched more
firmly than ever. Heidi jumped and bounded gaily by their side. In all
this excitement the grandfather did not lose his judgment, and before
long lifted Clara on his arm to carry her home. He knew that too much
exertion would be dangerous, and rest was needed for the tired girl.

Peter, arriving in the village late that day, saw a large disputing
crowd. They were all standing about an interesting object, and
everybody pushed and fought for a chance to get nearest. It was no
other than the chair.

"I saw it when they carried it up," Peter heard the baker say. "I bet
it was worth at least five hundred francs. I should just like to know
how it has happened."

"The wind might have blown it down," remarked Barbara, who was staring
open-mouthed at the beautiful velvet cushions. "The uncle said so
himself."

"It is a good thing if nobody else has done it," continued the baker.
"When the gentleman from Frankfurt hears what has happened, he'll
surely find out all about it, and I should pity the culprit. I am glad
I haven't been up on the Alm for so long, else they might suspect me,
as they would anybody who happened to be up there at the time."

Many more opinions were uttered, but Peter had heard enough. He
quietly slipped away and went home. What if they should find out he
had done it? A policeman might arrive any time now and they might take
him away to prison. Peter's hair stood up on end at this alarming
thought.

He was so troubled when he came home that he did not answer any
questions and even refused his dish of potatoes. Hurriedly creeping
into bed, he groaned.

"I am sure Peter has eaten sorrel again, and that makes him groan so,"
said his mother.

"You must give him a little more bread in the morning, Brigida. Take a
piece of mine," said the compassionate grandmother.

When Clara and Heidi were lying in their beds that night, glancing up
at the shining stars, Heidi remarked: "Didn't you think to-day, Clara,
that it is fortunate God does not always give us what we pray for
fervently, because He knows of something better?"

"What do you mean, Heidi?" asked Clara.

"You see, when I was in Frankfurt I prayed and prayed to come home
again, and when I couldn't, I thought He had forgotten me. But if I
had gone away so soon you would never have come here and would never
have got well."

Clara, becoming thoughtful, said: "But, Heidi, then we could not pray
for anything any more, because we would feel that He always knows of
something better."

"But, Clara, we must pray to God every day to show we don't forget
that all gifts come from Him. Grandmama has told me that God forgets
us if we forget Him. But if some wish remains unfulfilled we must show
our confidence in Him, for he knows best."

"How did you ever think of that?" asked Clara.

"Grandmama told me, but I know that it is so. We must thank God to-day
that He has made you able to walk, Clara."

"I am glad that you have reminded me, Heidi, for I have nearly
forgotten it in my excitement."

The children both prayed and sent their thanks up to heaven for the
restoration of the invalid.

Next morning a letter was written to grandmama, inviting her to come
up to the Alp within a week's time, for the children had planned to
take her by surprise. Clara hoped then to be able to walk alone, with
Heidi for her guide.

The following days were happier still for Clara. Every morning she
awoke with her heart singing over and over again, "Now I am well! Now
I can walk like other people!"

She progressed, and took longer walks every day. Her appetite grew
amazingly, and the grandfather had to make larger slices of the bread
and butter that, to his delight, disappeared so rapidly. He had to
fill bowl after bowl of the foaming milk for the hungry children. In
that way they reached the end of the week that was to bring the
grandmama.

[Illustration]




XXIII

PARTING TO MEET AGAIN


A day before her visit the grandmama had sent a letter to announce her
coming. Peter brought it up with him next morning. The grandfather was
already before the hut with the children and his merry goats. His face
looked proud, as he contemplated the rosy faces of the girls and the
shining hair of his two goats.

Peter, approaching, neared the uncle slowly. As soon as he had
delivered the letter, he sprang back shyly, looking about him as if he
was afraid. Then with a leap he started off.

"I should like to know why Peter behaves like the Big Turk when he is
afraid of the rod," said Heidi, watching his strange behavior.

"Maybe Peter fears a rod that he deserves," said the old man.

All the way Peter was tormented with fear. He could not help thinking
of the policeman who was coming from Frankfurt to fetch him to prison.

It was a busy morning for Heidi, who put the hut in order for the
expected visitor. The time went by quickly, and soon everything was
ready to welcome the good grandmama.

The grandfather also returned from a walk, on which he had gathered a
glorious bunch of deep-blue gentians. The children, who were sitting
on the bench, exclaimed for joy when they saw the glowing flowers.

Heidi, getting up from time to time to spy down the path, suddenly
discovered grandmama, sitting on a white horse and accompanied by two
men. One of them carried plenty of wraps, for without those the lady
did not dare to pay such a visit.

The party came nearer and nearer, and soon reached the top.

"What do I see? Clara, what is this? Why are you not sitting in your
chair? How is this possible?" cried the grandmama in alarm,
dismounting hastily. Before she had quite reached the children she
threw her arms up in great excitement:

"Clara, is that really you? You have red, round cheeks, my child! I
hardly know you any more!" Grandmama was going to rush at her
grandchild, when Heidi slipped from the bench, and Clara, taking her
arm, they quietly took a little walk. The grandmama was rooted to the
spot from fear. What was this? Upright and firm, Clara walked beside
her friend. When they came back their rosy faces beamed. Rushing
toward the children, the grandmother hugged them over and over again.

Looking over to the bench, she beheld the uncle, who sat there
smiling. Taking Clara's arm in hers, she walked over to him,
continually venting her delight. When she reached the old man, she
took both his hands in hers and said:

"My dear, dear uncle! What have we to thank you for! This is your
work, your care and nursing--"

"But our Lord's sunshine and mountain air," interrupted the uncle,
smiling.

Then Clara called, "Yes, and also Schwänli's good, delicious milk.
Grandmama, you ought to see how much goat-milk I can drink now; oh, it
is so good!"

"Indeed I can see that from your cheeks," said the grandmama, smiling.
"No, I hardly recognize you any more. You have become broad and round!
I never dreamt that you could get so stout and tall! Oh, Clara, is it
really true? I cannot look at you enough. But now I must telegraph
your father to come. I shan't tell him anything about you, for it will
be the greatest joy of all his life. My dear uncle, how are we going
to manage it? Have you sent the men away?"

"I have, but I can easily send the goatherd."

So they decided that Peter should take the message. The uncle
immediately whistled so loud that it resounded from all sides. Soon
Peter arrived, white with fear, for he thought his doom had come. But
he only received a paper that was to be carried to the post-office of
the village.

Relieved for the moment, Peter set out. Now all the happy friends sat
down round the table, and grandmama was told how the miracle had
happened. Often the talk was interrupted by exclamations of surprise
from grandmama, who still believed it was all a dream. How could this
be her pale, weak little Clara? The children were in a constant state
of joy, to see how their surprise had worked.

Meanwhile Mr. Sesemann, having finished his business in Paris, was
also preparing a surprise. Without writing his mother he traveled to
Ragatz on a sunny summer morning. He had arrived on this very day,
some hours after his mother's departure, and now, taking a carriage,
he drove to Mayenfeld.

The long ascent to the Alp from there seemed very weary and far to
the traveller. When would he reach the goat-herd's hut? There were
many little roads branching off in several directions, and sometimes
Mr. Sesemann doubted if he had taken the right path. But not a soul
was near, and no sound could be heard except the rustling of the wind
and the hum of little insects. A merry little bird was singing on a
larch-tree, but nothing more.

Standing still and cooling his brow, he saw a boy running down the
hill at topmost speed. Mr. Sesemann called to him, but with no
success, for the boy kept at a shy distance.

"Now, my boy, can't you tell me if I am on the right path to the hut
where Heidi lives and the people from Frankfurt are staying?"

A dull sound of terror was the only reply. Peter shot off and rushed
head over heels down the mountain-side, turning wild somersaults on
his perilous way. His course resembled the course his enemy had taken
some days ago.

[Illustration: PETER SHOT OFF AND RUSHED DOWN THE MOUNTAIN-SIDE,
TURNING WILD SOMERSAULTS ON HIS PERILOUS WAY]

"What a funny, bashful mountaineer!" Mr. Sesemann remarked to himself,
thinking that the appearance of a stranger had upset this simple son
of the Alps. After watching the downward course of the boy a little
while, he soon proceeded on his way.

In spite of the greatest effort, Peter could not stop himself, and
kept rolling on. But his fright and terror were still more terrible
than his bumps and blows. This stranger was the policeman, that was a
certain fact! At last, being thrown against a bush, he clutched it
wildly.

"Good, here's another one!" a voice near Peter said. "I wonder who is
going to be pushed down tomorrow, looking like a half-open
potato-bag?" The village baker was making fun of him. For a little
rest after his weary work, he had quietly watched the boy.

Peter regained his feet and slunk away. How did the baker know the
chair had been pushed? He longed to go home to bed and hide, for there
alone he felt safe. But he had to go up to the goats, and the uncle
had clearly told him to come back as quickly as he could. Groaning, he
limped away up to the Alp. How could he run now, with his fear and all
his poor, sore limbs?

Mr. Sesemann had reached the hut soon after meeting Peter, and felt
reassured. Climbing further, with renewed courage, he at last saw his
goal before him, but not without long and weary exertion. He saw the
Alm-hut above him, and the swaying fir-trees. Mr. Sesemann eagerly
hurried to encounter his beloved child. They had seen him long ago
from the hut, and a treat was prepared for him that he never
suspected.

As he made the last steps, he saw two forms coming towards him. A tall
girl, with light hair and rosy face, was leaning on Heidi, whose dark
eyes sparkled with keen delight. Mr. Sesemann stopped short, staring
at this vision. Suddenly big tears rushed from his eyes, for this
shape before him recalled sweet memories. Clara's mother had looked
exactly like this fair maiden. Mr. Sesemann at this moment did not
know if he was awake or dreaming.

"Papa, don't you know me any more?" Clara called with beaming eyes.
"Have I changed so much?"

Mr. Sesemann rushed up to her, folding her in his arms. "Yes, you
_have_ changed. How is it possible? Is it really true? Is it really
you, Clara?" asked the over-joyed father, embracing her again and
again, and then gazing at her, as she stood tall and firm by his side.

His mother joined them now, for she wanted to see the happiness of her
son.

"What do you say to this, my son? Isn't our surprise finer than
yours?" she greeted him. "But come over to our benefactor now,--I mean
the uncle."

"Yes, indeed, I also must greet our little Heidi," said the gentleman,
shaking Heidi's hand. "Well? Always fresh and happy on the mountain? I
guess I don't need to ask, for no Alpine rose can look more blooming.
Ah, child, what joy this is to me!"

With beaming eyes the child looked at the kind gentleman who had
always been so good to her. Her heart throbbed in sympathy with his
joy. While the two men, who had at last approached each other, were
conversing, grandmama walked over to the grove. There, under the
fir-trees, another surprise awaited her. A beautiful bunch of
wondrously blue gentians stood as if they had grown there.

"How exquisite, how wonderful! What a sight!" she exclaimed, clapping
her hands. "Heidi, come here! Have you brought me those? Oh, they are
beautiful!"

The children had joined her, Heidi assuring her that it was another
person's deed.

"Oh grandmama, up on the pasture it looks just like that," Clara
remarked. "Just guess who brought you the flowers?"

At that moment a rustle was heard, and they saw Peter, who was trying
to sneak up behind the trees to avoid the hut. Immediately the old
lady called to him, for she thought that Peter himself had picked the
flowers for her. He must be creeping away out of sheer modesty, the
kind lady thought. To give him his reward, she called:

"Come here, my boy! don't be afraid."

Petrified with fear, Peter stood still. What had gone before had
robbed him of his courage. He thought now that all was over with him.
With his hair standing up on end and his pale face distorted by
anguish, he approached.

"Come straight to me, boy," the old lady encouraged him. "Now tell me,
boy, if you have done that."

In his anxiety, Peter did not see the grandmama's finger that pointed
to the flowers. He only saw the uncle standing near the hut, looking
at him penetratingly, and beside him the policeman, the greatest
horror for him in the world. Trembling in every limb, Peter answered,
"Yes!"

"Well, but what are you so frightened about?"

"Because--because it is broken and can never be mended again," Peter
said, his knees tottering under him.

The grandmama now walked over to the hut: "My dear uncle," she asked
kindly, "is this poor lad out of his mind?"

"Not at all," was the reply; "only the boy was the wind which blew
away the wheel-chair. He is expecting the punishment he well
deserves."

Grandmama was very much surprised, for she vowed that Peter looked far
from wicked. Why should he have destroyed the chair? The uncle told
her that he had noticed many signs of anger in the boy since Clara's
advent on the Alp. He assured her that he had suspected the boy from
the beginning.

"My dear uncle," the old lady said with animation, "we must not punish
him further. We must be just. It was very hard on him when Clara
robbed him of Heidi, who is and was his greatest treasure. When he had
to sit alone day after day, it roused him to a passion which drove him
to this wicked deed. It was rather foolish, but we all get so when we
get angry."

The lady walked over to the boy again, who was still quivering with
fear.

Sitting down on the bench, she began:

"Come, Peter, I'll tell you something. Stop trembling and listen. You
pushed the chair down, to destroy it. You knew very well that it was
wicked and deserved punishment. You tried very hard to conceal it, did
you not? But if somebody thinks that nobody knows about a wicked deed,
he is wrong; God always knows it. As soon as He finds that a man is
trying to conceal an evil he has done, He wakens a little watchman in
his heart, who keeps on pricking the person with a thorn till all his
rest is gone. He keeps on calling to the evildoer: 'Now you'll be
found out! Now your punishment is near!'--His joy has flown, for fear
and terror take its place. Have you not just had such an experience,
Peter?"

Peter nodded, all contrite. He certainly had experienced this.

"You have made a mistake," the grandmama continued, "by thinking that
you would hurt Clara by destroying her chair. It has so happened that
what you have done has been the greatest good for her. She would
probably never have tried to walk, if her chair had been there. If she
should stay here, she might even go up to the pasture every single
day. Do you see, Peter? God can turn a misdeed to the good of the
injured person and bring trouble on the offender. Have you understood
me, Peter? Remember the little watchman when you long to do a wicked
deed again. Will you do that?"

"Yes, I shall," Peter replied, still fearing the policeman, who had
not left yet.

"So now that matter is all settled," said the old lady in conclusion.
"Now tell me if you have a wish, my boy, for I am going to give you
something by which to remember your friends from Frankfurt. What is
it? What would you like to have?"

Peter, lifting his head, stared at the grandmama with round,
astonished eyes. He was confused by this sudden change of prospect.

Being again urged to utter a wish, he saw at last that he was saved
from the power of the terrible man. He felt as if the most crushing
load had fallen off him. He knew now that it was better to confess at
once, when something had gone wrong, so he said: "I have also lost the
paper."

Reflecting a while, the grandmama understood and said: "That is right.
Always confess what is wrong, then it can be settled. And now, what
would you like to have?"

So Peter could choose everything in the world he wished. His brain got
dizzy. He saw before him all the wonderful things in the fair in
Mayenfeld. He had often stood there for hours, looking at the pretty
red whistles and the little knives; unfortunately Peter had never
possessed more than half what those objects cost.

He stood thinking, not able to decide, when a bright thought struck
him.

"Ten pennies," said Peter with decision.

"That certainly is not too much," the old lady said with a smile,
taking out of her pocket a big, round thaler, on top of which she
laid twenty pennies. "Now I'll explain this to you. Here you have as
many times ten pennies as there are weeks in the year. You'll be able
to spend one every Sunday through the year."

"All my life?" Peter asked quite innocently.

The grandmama began to laugh so heartily at this that the two men came
over to join her.

Laughingly she said: "You shall have it my boy; I will put it in my
will and then you will do the same, my son. Listen! Peter the goatherd
shall have a ten-penny piece weekly as long as he lives."

Mr. Sesemann nodded.

Peter, looking at his gift, said solemnly: "God be thanked!" Jumping
and bounding, he ran away. His heart was so light that he felt he
could fly.

A little later the whole party sat round the table holding a merry
feast. After dinner, Clara, who was lively as never before, said to
her father:

"Oh, Papa, if you only knew all the things grandfather did for me. It
would take many days to tell you; I shall never forget them all my
life. Oh, if we could please him only half as much as what he did for
me."

"It is my greatest wish, too, dear child," said her father; "I have
been trying to think of something all the time. We have to show our
gratitude in some way."

Accordingly Mr. Sesemann walked over to the old man, and began: "My
dear friend, may I say one word to you. I am sure you believe me when
I tell you that I have not known any real joy for years. What was my
wealth to me when I could not cure my child and make her happy! With
the help of the Lord you have made her well. You have given her a new
life. Please tell me how to show my gratitude to you. I know I shall
never be able to repay you, but what is in my power I shall do. Have
you any request to make? Please let me know."

The uncle had listened quietly and had looked at the happy father.

"Mr. Sesemann, you can be sure that I also am repaid by the great joy
I experience at the recovery of Clara," said the uncle firmly. "I
thank you for your kind offer, Mr. Sesemann. As long as I live I have
enough for me and the child. But I have one wish. If this could be
fulfilled, my life would be free of care."

"Speak, my dear friend," urged Clara's father.

"I am old," continued the uncle, "and shall not live many years. When
I die I cannot leave Heidi anything. The child has no relations except
one, who even might try to take advantage of her if she could. If you
would give me the assurance, Mr. Sesemann, that Heidi will never be
obliged to go into the world and earn her bread, you would amply repay
me for what I was able to do for you and Clara."

"My dear friend, there is no question of that," began Mr. Sesemann;
"the child belongs to us! I promise at once that we shall look after
her so that there will not be any need of her ever earning her bread.
We all know that she is not fashioned for a life among strangers.
Nevertheless, she has made some true friends, and one of them will be
here very shortly. Dr. Classen is just now completing his last
business in Frankfurt. He intends to take your advice and live here.
He has never felt so happy as with you and Heidi. The child will have
two protectors near her, and I hope with God's will, that they may be
spared a long, long time."

"And may it be God's will!" added the grandmama, who with Heidi had
joined them, shaking the uncle tenderly by the hand. Putting her arms
around the child, she said: "Heidi, I want to know if you also have a
wish?"

"Yes indeed, I have," said Heidi, pleased.

"Tell me what it is, child!"

"I should like to have my bed from Frankfurt with the three high
pillows and the thick, warm cover. Then grandmother will be able to
keep warm and won't have to wear her shawl in bed. Oh, I'll be so
happy when she won't have to lie with her head lower than her heels,
hardly able to breathe!"

Heidi had said all this in one breath, she was so eager.

"Oh dear, I had nearly forgotten what I meant to do. I am so glad you
have reminded me, Heidi. If God sends us happiness we must think of
those who have many privations. I shall telegraph immediately for the
bed, and if Miss Rottenmeier sends it off at once, it can be here in
two days. I hope the poor blind grandmother will sleep better when it
comes."

Heidi, in her happiness, could hardly wait to bring the old woman the
good news. Soon it was resolved that everybody should visit the
grandmother, who had been left alone so long. Before starting,
however, Mr. Sesemann revealed his plans. He proposed to travel
through Switzerland with his mother and Clara. He would spend the
night in the village, so as to fetch Clara from the Alm next morning
for the journey. From there they would go first to Ragatz and then
further. The telegram was to be mailed that night.

Clara's feelings were divided, for she was sorry to leave the Alp, but
the prospect of the trip delighted her.

When everything was settled, they all went down, the uncle carrying
Clara, who could not have risked the lengthy walk. All the way down
Heidi told the old lady of her friends in the hut; the cold they had
to bear in winter and the little food they had.

Brigida was just hanging up Peter's shirt to dry, when the whole
company arrived. Rushing into the house, she called to her mother:
"Now they are all going away. Uncle is going, too, carrying the lame
child."

"Oh, must it really be?" sighed the grandmother. "Have you seen
whether they took Heidi away? Oh, if she only could give me her hand
once more! Oh, I long to hear her voice once more!"

The same moment the door was flung open and Heidi held her tight.

"Grandmother, just think. My bed with the three pillows and the thick
cover is coming from Frankfurt. Grandmama has said that it will be
here in two days."

Heidi thought that grandmother would be beside herself with joy, but
the old woman, smiling sadly, said:

"Oh, what a good lady she must be! I know I ought to be glad she is
taking you with her, Heidi, but I don't think I shall survive it
long."

"But nobody has said so," the grandmama, who had overheard those
words, said kindly. Pressing the old woman's hand, she continued: "It
is out of the question. Heidi will stay with you and make you happy.
To see Heidi again, we will come up every year to the Alm, for we have
many reasons to thank the Lord there."

Immediately the face of the grandmother lighted up, and she cried
tears of joy.

"Oh, what wonderful things God is doing for me!" said the grandmother,
deeply touched. "How good people are to trouble themselves about such
a poor old woman as I. Nothing in this world strengthens the belief in
a good Father in Heaven more than this mercy and kindness shown to a
poor, useless little woman, like me."

"My dear grandmother," said Mrs. Sesemann, "before God in Heaven we
are all equally miserable and poor; woe to us, if He should forget
us!--But now we must say good-bye; next year we shall come to see you
just as soon as we come up the Alp. We shall never forget you!" With
that, Mrs. Sesemann shook her hand. It was some time before she was
allowed to leave, however, because the grandmother thanked her over
and over again, and invoked all Heaven's blessings on her and her
house.

Mr. Sesemann and his mother went on down, while Clara was carried up
to spend her last night in the hut.

Next morning, Clara shed hot tears at parting from the beloved place,
where such gladness had been hers. Heidi consoled her with plans for
the coming summer, that was to be even more happy than this one had
been. Mr. Sesemann then arrived, and a few last parting words were
exchanged.

Clara, half crying, suddenly said: "Please give my love to Peter and
the goats, Heidi! Please greet Schwänli especially from me, for she
has helped a great deal in making me well. What could I give her?"

"You can send her salt, Clara. You know how fond she is of that,"
advised little Heidi.

"Oh, I will surely do that," Clara assented. "I'll send her a hundred
pounds of salt as a remembrance from me."

It was time to go now, and Clara was able to ride proudly beside her
father. Standing on the edge of the slope, Heidi waved her hand, her
eyes following Clara till she had disappeared.

       *       *       *       *       *

The bed has arrived. Grandmother sleeps so well every night now, that
before long she will be stronger than ever. Grandmama has not
forgotten the cold winter on the Alp and has sent a great many warm
covers and shawls to the goatherd's hut. Grandmother can wrap herself
up now and will not have to sit shivering in a corner.

In the village a large building is in progress. The doctor has arrived
and is living at present in his old quarters. He has taken the uncle's
advice and has bought the old ruins that sheltered Heidi and her
grandfather the winter before. He is rebuilding for himself the
portion with the fine apartment already mentioned. The other side is
being prepared for Heidi and her grandfather. The doctor knows that
his friend is an independent man and likes to have his own dwelling.
Bärli and Schwänli, of course, are not forgotten; they will spend the
winter in a good solid stable that is being built for them.

The doctor and the Alm-Uncle become better friends every day. When
they overlook the progress of the building, they generally come to
speak of Heidi. They both look forward to the time when they will be
able to move into the house with their merry charge. They have agreed
to share together the pleasure and responsibility that Heidi brings
them. The uncle's heart is filled with gratitude too deep for any
words when the doctor tells him that he will make ample provision for
the child. Now her grandfather's heart is free of care, for if he is
called away, another father will take care of Heidi and love her in
his stead.

At the moment when our story closes, Heidi and Peter are sitting in
grandmother's hut. The little girl has so many interesting things to
relate and Peter is trying so hard not to miss anything, that in their
eagerness they are not aware that they are near the happy
grandmother's chair. All summer long they have hardly met, and very
many wonderful things have happened. They are all glad at being
together again, and it is hard to tell who is the happiest of the
group. I think Brigida's face is more radiant than any, for Heidi has
just told her the story of the perpetual ten-penny piece. Finally the
grandmother says: "Heidi, please read me a song of thanksgiving and
praise. I feel that I must praise and thank the Lord for the blessings
He has brought to us all!"


The End.

   [Illustration: (Heidi)]

   [Illustration: (Peter)]


       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Typographical errors corrected in text:                   |
    |                                                           |
    | Page 227: freindly replaced with friendly                 |
    | Page 251: tham replaced with than                         |
    |                                                           |
    | In this edition, the poem on page 246, is missing the     |
    | lines for G, H, I, J, and K.                              |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+



       *       *       *       *       *








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Heidi, by Johanna Spyri

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEIDI ***

***** This file should be named 20781-8.txt or 20781-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/7/8/20781/

Produced by Jason Isbell, Emma Morgan Isbell, Jeannie Howse
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net. This file is gratefully uploaded to
the PG collection in honor of Distributed Proofreaders
having posted over 10,000 ebooks.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.